MasterChef.
The biggest cooking show in the world.
Right now the search is on for a new champion.
From coast to coast, they came The biggest cooking show on the planet.
Searched the entire country for the greatest home cook in America! This is MasterChef! Each bring their own story.
- I'm a marine.
- I'm a waiter.
- I'm a real estate agent.
- I'm a salesman.
- I'm a schoolteacher.
- I'm a student! I'm a stay-at-home mom! I'm a stay-at-home dad! And for the 30 best home cooks who earned the chance, they'll have to prove themselves to three of the biggest names In the culinary world.
Michelin star chef Graham Elliot, world-renowned restaurateur Joe Bastianich, and culinary legend Gordon Ramsay.
Here they come! This year, the competition will be bigger and more challenging than ever before.
You got 60 guests, the bride and groom and their wedding! Now the stage is set for America's top home cooks to do the battle.
Save your place in the MasterChef kitchen.
And tonight they will prove themselves against I accept that challenge.
Gordon Ramsay.
I'll cook alongside all of you.
After an extensive nationwide search, the MasterChef judges have selected the top 30 best home cooks in America to battle it out for a white apron in the MasterChef kitchen.
I've been cooking since I was, like, 12.
Now I'm in the MasterChef top 30.
You have beat thousands and thousands of people.
I said, "This is real.
" I'm super passionate about food.
I want to write cookbooks.
I don't want to go home with my tail between my legs.
I want that apron.
I don't enter competitions that I don't plan on winning.
I'm confident enough that I know I'm gonna get an apron.
It's just "When am I gonna get an apron?" I am a law school graduate, But I was born into a family that cooks a lot.
My dream is to open up a restaurant.
Getting that apron will really ignite who I am in my journey here in life.
The game starts right now in this kitchen.
I'm getting an apron.
The rest of you guys, figure it out amongst yourselves.
I'm here to do this.
Welcome to the MasterChef kitchen.
You are about to do battle in the biggest culinary competition anywhere in the world today.
This is the search for the best home cook in America.
One of you 30 home cooks standing here before us will become America's next MasterChef.
One of you home cooks will win $250 million.
One of you will be immortalized in the kitchens of America with your very own cookbook.
And that's not all.
There's another prize.
The MasterChef trophy.
This trophy is the validation of one person's incredible journey from home cook to MasterChef.
Before any of you get near that trophy, you still have to earn one of these.
A MasterChef apron.
Win an apron, and you are in with the chance of becoming this year's MasterChef.
If you don't win one, well, you go home.
We care about one thing and one thing only, and that is what you put on a plate.
Are you ready to face the challenge that can earn you a MasterChef apron? Are you ready? Yes! You'll be given just one hour to conceive, create, and plate one stunning dish.
On the face of it, this challenge is simple.
Please turn over your chopping boards.
What exactly does this mean? When I saw myself in the mirror, I was like, "Damn, I look good.
" But I have no idea what's in store.
To win an apron, we need you to put yourself on a plate.
This is your chance to create a dish that speaks to us about you.
Think about your life story, and put it on that plate.
Show us your signature dish.
My signature dish is coriander crusted shrimp.
Because I am from Louisiana, this is me on a plate, with a little bit of latina.
I'm gonna make a venison chimichurri.
I'm a hunter.
I cook venison all the time.
It's an homage to me and where I grew up.
This is me on a plate.
When you go into the pantry, look around.
Look at all the incredible items you have at your fingertips.
You won't find a better pantry anywhere in the world.
Use those ingredients to showcase you and your signature dish.
Oh, just one more thing.
Not all of you are gonna make it through the next hour.
As you cook, we'll be watching your every move, and if we don't like what we see, you will be going home immediately.
It's insane that they will pull people in the middle of their cook.
I'm not gonna lie.
It is terrifying.
Are you ready? Yes, chef! Your one hour starts Now.
Good luck.
The competition begins not at the ranges but in the pantry.
Where's the flour? Where's the flour? This is a signature dish.
You have to be disciplined, deciding which of these ingredients they want to cook with.
You got to stay clear to your ideas.
Excuse me.
Excuse me.
- Sorry.
- Excuse me.
I'm making my white wine apricot chicken.
This dish is something that I would do at home.
I can really show who I am as a person and then tell my competitors, "You need to be watching out.
" Oh, Willie, my chemicals.
I love my chemicals, Willie.
My strengths as a cook really come from my love of technology.
I do a lot of molecular gastronomy which involves powders and chemicals.
To get this apron, it really means everything to me.
Oh, my god! Let's go.
Wow.
So the biggest search we've ever had.
These are the 30 finalists, the 30 best home cooks in America.
We know that these guys can cook.
The question is: Can they do what they do here in the MasterChef kitchen? We're gonna eliminate someone immediately.
What are we looking for? The way they're organized, disorganized.
Are they caked in flour? The knife work's got to be right.
They've got to be clean.
That is the very basics.
I'm making peanut butter bread pudding with a mixed berry compote, chocolate covered pretzels, and a little creme fraiche sauce.
It shows who I am.
I elevate comfort food to a higher level.
I'm taking a peanut butter and jelly sandwich and turning it into something you could put on a restaurant menu.
I'm making chicken liver ravioli with a fresh-made ricotta.
Reducing down probably most of the bottle of wine, some champagne, vinegar.
I'm gonna crush everybody under my techniques, and then I'm gonna be making some fresh dough here in a minute.
Today I am making blueberry goat cheese and basil hand pies.
I've always loved food, but it's only been in the last year or so that I really realized I don't want to be working in a cubicle for the rest of my life.
I want to be cooking for the rest of my life, and I think something as crazy as being on MasterChef is gonna give me the courage to take hold of my dreams.
I want an apron with every part of my being.
I want to be here so bad and prove that I can do this, and I know that I can.
I know I can.
Come on! Yeah.
This smells good.
What is it? It's my ramen stock.
I got some chicken bones.
I got dashi in there.
I'm gonna add a little soy sauce.
It's got aromatics.
Some ginger.
Some garlic.
It smells amazing.
Let's go, guys.
Willie, all right, what are you doing? Right now I'm making my sauce for my chicken.
What's in there? Apricot preserves, white wine, but I am adding a kick to it, so it is all gonna balance out.
Good luck.
- Tyler.
- Hey, chefs, how are you? Good.
Good.
What are you making? - Venison.
- Is this sauce finished already? Yes, sir.
It's a chimichurri.
What is that? Might want to make sure you go back and taste that.
- Gavin.
- Yes, sir.
You're making so many things.
- You're doing the ricotta.
- Yes.
- You're making fresh pasta.
- Yes.
Why something so complicated? Cause you know what? I don't think anybody here else has the techniques that I do.
So that is the chicken liver.
Taste it.
Quick.
- What's the one thing that needs? - Salt.
Bugger! I've broken my syringe, and I have absolutely no idea what to do.
I brought this from home.
They don't have them here.
I need a syringe to pump my spaghetti with these.
All of you, stop! Knives down! Now! I told you we were watching every move.
We told you some of you will not make it trough the hour.
Oh, boy.
Better not call out my name.
He did call out the salt issue.
I fixed that immediately.
Hopefully, hopefully, hopefully he doesn't call me out.
My syringe broke right at the beginning of all my magic molecular bullocks.
So this point I'm thinking I've got no chance.
I know my chimichurri was a mess, but I can make it better.
To be handed an apron means everything.
I can't go home.
Right now one of you will be leaving MasterChef.
It's the first day in the MasterChef kitchen for 30 home cooks who are preparing their signature dishes in hopes of winning a coveted white apron.
All of you, stop! We told you some of you will not make it through the hour.
Gavin, from the minute you started cooking, you've forgotten the most important ingredient.
You're not tasting anything as you cook.
Chicken liver pate - bland.
It's just not MasterChef.
Turn off your gas.
You are out of the competition.
The rest of you, continue.
Oh, my god.
There's a lot of pressure in the kitchen.
You know, going into this, I was like, "Oh, it's not gonna be that hard.
" But with all the frantic activity going on around you, it's a lot more difficult than I thought.
Really focus on you on a plate.
Francis, how are you doing? I had a little emergency.
My syringe broke, so I've had to figure out another way to make my tomato spaghetti.
What the hell are you doing [bleep] around with a syringe at such a critical stage? You know, I live life on the edge.
I'm gonna make it.
How are you gonna utilize it? How are you gonna get this back? Hoping that this squeeze bottle and tube can work.
- Please fit.
- Good luck.
I'm making ricotta gnocchi in a brown butter sage sauce with some peas.
When I was in my senior year of college, I was taking 18 credits, I had five jobs, and I still couldn't pay my rent, so I had to make the decision to go work in a gentlemen's club.
But I can't be an entertainer forever.
But I can be a cook forever.
This is the most important dish of my entire life right now.
Yes, I have to get that white apron.
I got to be here tomorrow and the next day and the next day, all the way until I get that MasterChef trophy.
All right, Natanya, what are you doing? This is my lemon butter caper sauce.
Is there wine in there? - A little bit.
- It´s like, raw wine still? Yeah.
- You should taste that.
- Really? Elizabeth, how's the dish? Coming together great.
The peanut butter bread pudding is in the oven, and this is the mixed berry compote to go on top.
Let me have a look.
Right.
Is that gonna cook in time? I hope so, chef.
Why'd you do 'em so deep in such a big mold? Um, I just wanted you to get in there So it's not fully cooked through-- Yeah, but we're not cooking a flat tray.
You've still got mix there left, haven't you? - Okay, yeah.
- Get it in flat.
You know, like you're making a brownie.
- Okay.
So, some pretty good dishes out there.
- Yeah.
- I'm impressed.
There were some surprises.
- Dan's ramen dish.
- Awesome.
Pure, authentic courageous cooking.
Simple.
Right on.
Tyler's got his chimichurri down.
It's nice that he's rethinking it.
Willie, I mean, he's playing to his strengths.
The sauce, the pan-dripping He shows skill.
But there's some there that didn't push the boat out good enough.
Ten minutes left.
Everybody, knives down! Natanya, turn your gas off.
Your sauce is broken, over-acidulated.
Raw wine.
Too many technical errors.
Please leave the MasterChef kitchen.
Okay.
All of you, eight minutes to go.
Eight minutes to keep yourself in the competition.
Come on.
Let's go.
Seasoning, plating.
We want to see beautiful dishes as well as delicious dishes.
Taste everything before it goes on that plate.
Let's go, guys! Pull it together! This is it! Get it sauced, get it wiped, get it garnished! Save your place in the MasterChef kitchen.
And stop.
Hands in the air.
Well done.
Even from here, some of those dishes look and smell delicious.
After observing and sampling all the dishes throughout the challenge, the judges will now take one final taste to determine which home cooks will receive a MasterChef apron and move on to the next stage of the competition.
Your technique is good, but I'm just not sure if it's worth my time taking you to next level.
It's good.
It's sweet.
Is this the absolute best that you could have done? These hand pies are good.
Why gnocchi? I'm a third-generation Italian.
I wanted to take something that was from home and make it into something that was mine.
So fresh ricotta mixed through.
Yes.
It actually tastes better than it looks.
Why is this you on a plate? I am a person of color.
I love sweet, salty, and different textures.
So this right here is bringing all those things together.
It's MasterChef.
Not Junior MasterChef.
Bold move making dessert.
If we call your name, come down here and receive your MasterChef white apron.
That apron in his hand, it represents so much.
That's gonna lead me to the title of MasterChef.
I just cooked my soul on that plate.
Like, put me out of my misery and say my name.
If I can take something as humble as a pbj and turn it into something that you'd want to eat at a restaurant, the apron is just like floating in front of my mind.
The first apron belongs to Courtney.
I came here with a dream.
Now it's really coming true.
Well done.
- Thank you.
Definitely you on a plate.
Authentic, brave, tenacious.
It's incredibly delicious.
- Great job.
- Good job.
Thank you.
MasterChef is gonna give me the tools that I need to create a new profession for myself.
Wow.
I'm so proud of myself.
There's another home cook whose dish showed us what this home cook is all about.
I put myself on that plate.
My flavors are good.
This dish does show my potential.
I'm hungry for it.
Like, I need that apron.
This is totally, like, freaking me out.
The next apron belongs to big Willie! Well done, big man.
Maybe they'll call my name next time.
Dan Wu.
Yeah! Jamiee.
Tyler.
The first couple aprons I'm thinking, "Yay.
There are all still so many more aprons to give out.
" - Victoria.
- Boom! - Christine.
- Kira.
Each bloody apron is disappearing, and I'm starting to get very nervous.
Christian.
Loren.
Cotter.
Jordan.
Daniel.
They keep calling names.
Whitney.
And none of them are my name.
This is the last apron.
There's no way they cannot give me an apron.
There's just absolutely no way.
This is has been a very tough decision.
I want that apron so badly.
I want this with every fiber of my being.
The last apron in this challenge belongs to I'm mentally preparing to make the phone call to my husband saying, "Now I'm coming home.
" If you don't win an apron, you go home.
The last apron in this challenge belongs to Elizabeth.
Congratulations.
Oh, thank god.
I'm officially a MasterChef competitor.
Really good job, indeed.
Congratulations.
Well done.
I finally feel validated and, like, I feel like I deserve to be here.
This is the best moment of my life.
You nine, please come down to the front.
Tough one, that one.
Elise.
How are you feeling? Pretty devastated, to be honest.
Why? I put my whole life on hold for this.
It was the start to something new.
Now I got to figure out something else.
Listen, you made it this far because clearly you are talented home cooks.
Yes, chef.
But we are not giving up on you just yet.
You all face one last and final chance for some, or all of you, to earn a MasterChef apron.
In that first challenge, you had the full pantry at your disposal.
Now you'll all be cooking with the same exact ingredients.
In the equipment room, each of you will find a refrigerator.
In each refrigerator, you will find identical ingredients-- the kind of things that you would find in millions of homes across America: bacon; bell peppers; carrots; shrimp; potatoes; and of course, the most popular protein: chicken.
Along with all those classic american ingredients, you'll also have the use of our own MasterChef staple pantry box.
So in this challenge, you'll take the most common ingredients likely to be found virtually in any fridge across the country and turn them into an amazing dish good enough to earn you a MasterChef apron.
But unlike being in your own house, one of us is going to cook alongside you.
Are you kidding me? So which of us three do you challenge? - Astrid.
- Gordon Ramsay.
I respect the hell out of you, so let's bring it, baby.
You and I, mano-a-mano.
I accept that challenge.
I'll cook alongside all of you.
You all have one hour to cook us something incredible, a dish that proves that you deserve to be in this competition.
You're gonna be cooking your dishes alongside Gordon Ramsay.
He's gonna show you what one day you can aspire to become.
- Now, is everyone ready? - Yes, chef! Your one hour to keep yourselves in this competition starts Now.
Holy bugger and bullocks.
We have a final challenge, an all-American challenge, and this is the time to prove that I'm not just a one-trick pony.
Anyone in America tonight could go in their refrigerator and cook along.
Everyone has potatoes.
Everyone has bacon.
Everyone has a piece of chicken.
I hope they have that imagination to use that hour to maximizing that flavor.
Ten minutes gone.
You ready? I was born ready, Graham.
Show us what you got, chef.
The coat is off.
Yay, chef! Chef, might I ask? - Please.
- What are you cooking? Wait and find out.
Okay, guys, time is running down.
Corey.
What are you making? We're gonna do a potato and parmesan souffle.
and cfc-- it's a corn-fried chicken.
Now, this is a dish you might make at home? - Yes.
- Have you made it before? - Not in this exact way.
Why would you on such an important dish-- Why would you change the techniques? 'Cause I'm evolving.
Elise, how are you doing? Chef, it's a pleasure to be cooking behind you.
What is that in there? This is the filling to a chicken pot pie.
I'm about to roll out my dough.
And you're not thinking it's a little bit dangerous doing a pie again? - It is.
- Wow.
I'm looking forward to that chicken pot pie.
- Yes, sir.
- Ah.
My kind of cooking is for feeding my family, so I'm gonna make a stuffed chicken breast with spinach, mushrooms, and bacon.
At the end of the day, if my children aren't eating at the table, I'm--I wasted all that food for nothing.
I'm 56 years old, and I'm a stay-at-home dad from Malibu, California.
Come on in.
Let me show you around.
Well, my wife's the breadwinner.
Married her with five children.
She was tired of being a stay-at-home wife.
And she seems to make more money than I ever would have, and things are good.
I can't complain.
I'd be a fool if I did.
When you're hot, you're hot, and I'm hot.
I'm gonna make this happen.
Guys, just over Look at Astrid's station.
Yeah.
Does she cook like that at home? This is not gonna fly.
This is disgusting.
This is not how you work in restaurants.
Everyone listen up a second.
We're not gonna tolerate disgusting working conditions.
This is a kitchen.
We have sanitary standards.
This is dangerous.
You're gonna fall.
You're gonna hurt yourself.
You're gonna hurt me, and I'm just not gonna tolerate it.
Nine home cooks have been given a second chance to earn an apron, using the most common everyday ingredients.
But while Gordon shows them what it takes to be a real MasterChef, some have not followed his example.
Astrid.
This is not gonna fly.
This is disgusting.
This is not how you work in restaurants.
Everyone listen up a second.
We're not gonna tolerate disgusting working conditions.
We have sanitary standards.
This is dangerous, and I'm just not gonna tolerate it.
Here we go.
I'm going home.
Back to my four children in New Orleans.
Take this as a warning, because if you were in my kitchen, you'd be taking a taxi home.
Wow.
I am embarrassed.
But all I know is that right now, Astrid, you've got to focus.
Thought they had people that cleaned.
Watch Gordon.
Look what he's doing.
Yeah.
He's using the french coffee press to put the broth in with fresh herbs.
So they'll keep steeping, so you're pressing those oils out of the actual herbs.
I've never seen that technique.
That's nice.
That's a nice idea.
Nine home cooks and one MasterChef.
Oh, she's shaking down there.
Poor thing.
Take a deep breath, Chandis.
Take a deep breath.
I am making rosti stacks, Which are, like potato pancakes with shrimp and a mint aioli.
I'm from Idaho, so I'm gonna make Idaho proud and make these potatoes perfect.
I grew up on a farm, gardening with my mom, and then hunting with my dad.
My parents taught me sustainability from a young age.
When you are able to cook and put in fresh ingredients, it can really revolutionize your life.
Five minutes, guys.
Five minutes left to cook.
Won't that burn, Leslie? No, not really.
Don't you worry about me.
I'm not worried about you.
All right.
You got a lot up your sleeve, right? I got a lot of tricks up this sleeve.
Show me.
I don't need to show you.
Just wait and see.
Let the judges be it.
You need one of these, right? Yeah, I want one of those.
And maybe, it might be yours.
One minute left! - Let's go, guys! - You got this! Take it home, guys.
Take it home.
Let's go.
Think about plating.
Think about style, finesse.
Polish up those plates, last looks.
This is where you can make a difference.
Let's go! - Where's Gordon going? - Come on, baby.
And stop.
Hands in the air.
Good job, guys.
Bring it up, chef.
Describe your dish, chef.
A delicious minted shrimp dumpling, cooked in a sweet and sour Asian style broth.
Please, have a taste it.
I had a bird's eye view of chef Ramsay's dish.
That was an awesome-looking dish.
It's delicious, chef.
What's the heat from? The heat was from the ginger, the chili flakes, and then the caramelized garlic.
That is the standard that you should be aspiring to reach.
Would the following three home cooks please bring their dishes up here.
Corey, Leslie, and little Gordon.
Let's go.
Three of you make your way down to the front, please.
First up, Gordon.
Please describe your dish.
I have a pan-seared chicken breast that I marinated in soy sauce, ginger, and mustard.
And then I have a soft-boiled egg and a potato puree.
So there's another Gordon in this kitchen.
And he made this right here.
Look at yours.
Now, if I didn't know who made what, I'd probably be able to know by now.
Chef, that's like the world series, and mine's, like, t-ball I think.
I don't even know if it's the same sport.
But Great flavor, the puree.
What else is in that? A little bit of butter, and at the very end added a little bit of chicken stock.
Overall, it's a tasty dish that you want to eat some more of.
- So good job.
- Thank you, chef.
Leslie.
Describe your dish.
It's a chicken breast stuffed with mushrooms, spinach, and bacon with a mashed potato and some carrots.
Leslie, where do you live? - Malibu, California.
- Malibu.
I don't think all of Malibu could eat this portion tonight.
Nice seasoning on the chicken.
Nice and crisp.
The skin on the top, good technique.
Delicious food.
Absurd portions.
Corey, let's go.
Here we have fried chicken With sauteed spinach with a potato souffle and a parmesan crisp.
It's a play on the souffle.
There's a golden rule in cooking: you never play with a souffle.
Yes, chef.
There's a golden rule in cooking.
You never play with a souffle.
Yes, chef.
Man Wow.
How did you cook the chicken? Deep-fried it at about 350 for ten minutes or so.
A little bit over, probably.
Man Here's the thing: I mean, if there's one staple across the country, it's fried chicken.
- Yeah.
- Well, you understand, so this should be done with your eyes closed.
I broke the plate.
My apologies.
The dish was broken way before that.
Thank you.
Man That's hard.
I understand if he didn't think it was the best.
It wasn't the best.
But I definitely still feel like I have a decent chance.
He utilized the time wisely.
The egg was stupid.
I had to prove to the chefs today I could present an immaculate dish based upon ingredients we all have at home, and I did that, and I deserve to be up there.
He's got the most important thing right: he's got the flavor perfectly.
I most certainly belong up there with any one of them, but at the end of the day, I think there are a lot of one-trick ponies in there.
And I don't want to be the only horse that gets kicked in the ass.
All right, guys.
We gave you a second chance.
Not everybody can take that chance and turn it into an apron.
Gordon Yes, chef.
I'm sorry.
You're not going back to school.
Oh, my god, thank you, chef.
Thank you so much.
Corey.
Yes, chef.
I think that we all three agree that your future is not in the MasterChef kitchen.
Understandable, chef.
It's the end of the road.
Thank you so much.
And then, Leslie, we have you.
Do you really need this competition? Yes.
I just need an honest-to-goodness chance to learn from some of the best people in the world.
We think we can teach you some new tricks.
Come get your apron.
Thank you very much.
I promise you you won't regret it.
Thank you.
Great job.
The next three home cooks are Astrid, Amy, and Michael.
Let's start off with Astrid.
Describe your dish.
Pan-seared chicken breast with a potato hash, a demi-glace, as well as a butter stock emulsion sauce.
Chicken's nailed.
Potatoes, bacon, delicious.
Really good indeed.
Seasoned.
Lemon Totally unnecessary.
Overall The flavor's there.
Thank you.
Amy, please bring your dish forward.
So today I made two tacos, a shrimp taco and a chicken taco, with a chimichurri sauce and bell pepper salsa.
I like the shrimp but the chicken's pretty dry.
Next up, michael.
That is a sauce piquant with a pan roasted chicken and a corn maque choux topped with a poached egg.
I want you to try that.
Oh, it's too salty.
One apron.
Three home cooks.
This apron belongs to Astrid.
Come and get it.
Wow.
Thank you.
Good dish, but clean it up in the kitchen.
Out of the three to only get that one apron, it's a fantastic feeling.
Hoo-rah.
Okay, final three, please make your way down to the front.
Okay, Francis.
Please bring us your plate.
So tell me everything that we have here.
It is a spinach pasta with a creamy, spicy sauce underneath with sous vide shrimp.
What's the thinking behind this thing? It was called runaway shrimp.
My concept was, it would look like seaweed, and the shrimp were leaving 'em running away from the seaweed.
I hope that it tastes great.
Pasta's great.
The shrimp are delicious, but This is the sauce here? Yes.
Made from the head? I'm not sure.
Chandis.
Please bring us your dish.
What's this dish called? This is a rosti stack with spinach, shrimp, and mint.
A rosti stack? It's potato pancakes, essentially.
You know, the shrimp, they're cooked fine.
But you know one of the worst offenses in the MasterChef kitchen? No.
Serve us raw potatoes.
Have a bite.
Is it raw? It is raw.
Last up, Elise.
Describe your dish.
It's chicken pot pie and it's succotash with roasted chicken, mushrooms, carrots.
Another bloody pie.
Two pies in one night.
- Redemption pie.
- Seriously? Yes.
Here's the really bizarre news.
Now you're starting to freak me out slightly, because it actually does taste good.
Thank you, chef.
- But it's a pot pie.
- I understand.
I wanted you to come out of your comfort zone.
Not dive back in it.
However, it may look a mess, but there is something there.
I might be the underdog right now, but I am scrappy and I'll fight for a privilege to please, please cook in this kitchen.
Thank you.
Thank you.
I left everything out on that plate, and it is very disheartening to feel that you have disappointed yourself and the judges.
Clearly three very talented home cooks fighting to continue that incredible journey across this competition.
Chandis You had 60 minutes to prove your potential to us.
There was some incredible moments across those 60 minutes, but you had some elements that were unforgivable.
Chandis Your journey started tonight, and it's ending tonight.
I'm sorry.
It's just not good enough to warrant an apron.
- Thank you.
- Good night.
It's been such an honor to be in the MasterChef kitchen.
I'm so proud of myself for doing it.
I didn't know what to expect jumping into this awesome challenge, but I definitely leave here a stronger person.
Francis I wanted you to cook again tonight to see what basic skills you have up your sleeve, to see what you're like with just good humble ingredients.
You made a very bold move making pasta for the very first time.
Francis Your journey is gonna continue.
Congratulations.
Yeah, francis! To get that apron handed to me by Gordon Ramsay, the most iconic chef to me in the world, it's just I can't-- it's just overwhelming.
Elise I know how much this means to you, but my frustration, I wasn't convinced by the pies in the first round.
We give you a second chance; another pie reemerges.
I don't-- I want this privilege to be here.
I want to cook with all these amazing people, and I want to prove my worth to myself and to you.
Young lady I'm sorry.
You are not going upstairs to the balcony.
Yes, chef.
Because they are coming down to congratulate you.
Well done.
Congratulations.
Thank you, chef.
I won't let you down.
No more pies.
Thank you.
No more pies.
Thank you.
Getting that apron and to shake chef Ramsay's hand and for him to say "Congratulations," I don't know, this might be the best day of my entire life so far.
You are the top 22.
Congratulations! You all should be incredibly proud because we are.
And now One of you 22 talented home cooks standing in front of us are gonna become america's next MasterChef.
Make sure it's you.
Next time on MasterChef, They've won their aprons It's time for the world's biggest cooking competition to truly begin.
And now the top 22 fight to keep them.
Oh, that smells good.
It isn't long before the knives come out.
I got where I got because I work.
You [bleep] live in Malibu.
You want drama, I'll give it to you.
And the brutal cuts begin.
Absolutely disgusting.
In a shocking double elimination.
Nobody wants this more than me.
Sync & correction: Kamèa 
After a nation wide search MasterChef, MasterChef! we brought the best home cooks in the country to compete in America's favorite kitchen.
But for the 22 that remain, it's only the beginning.
Come on.
- As the competition heats up - Whoo! the home cooks will have to endure some of the most ambitious Here they come! and explosive challenges in MasterChef history.
Whoo! I need you to look at me! Come here! Some will rise to the occasion You're playing the game at a high level.
This made my night.
Others will crash and burn.
Do the honors.
It's a battle for the title of MasterChef, $1/4 million, and their very own cookbook.
In the end, only one will be crowned America's next MasterChef.
What MasterChef would do for me is propel me to being a writer of what I really love, which is cookbooks.
Welcome, everybody.
Winning MasterChef would give me the opportunity to open a small, like, American nouveau cafe.
The dream is to open up my own restaurant And maybe you know, maybe be the MasterChef in it one day.
Great to see you all.
You are now all officially part of the biggest cooking competition in the entire world.
To win this competition, you'll have to be the last one standing here in the MasterChef kitchen.
Make sure that you bring us your "A" game every single time you put something on a plate.
Understood? - Yes, chef.
- Yes, sir.
Please, go to your stations.
It's time for the world's biggest cooking competition to truly begin with the very first mystery box challenge.
You'll each have 90 minutes to prepare, cook, and present one amazing dish using the ingredients hidden under those boxes.
As with all mystery boxes, we will be tasting everything as you cook.
On the count of three, carefully lift your boxes.
One Two Three.
- Wow.
- Yes! In front of you, you have chocolate, bananas, strawberries, blueberries, brandy, ladyfingers, all kinds of extracts, honey, and ground coffee.
I am so happy.
I love desserts.
I am very sweet, I must say.
One more thing At the end of this challenge, at least one of you will be going home.
The judges are going to eliminate somebody during this round and it's not even the elimination challenge? That's a really big deal.
Is everyone ready? Yes, chef.
Your 90 minutes starts Now.
So mystery box, season five, we start with desserts.
Technical.
Complete different ability.
It's gonna help us weed out those that really don't belong here, because you do have to be well-balanced to get sweet and savory.
What's the biggest mistake we see with mystery boxes like this one? This one? Overcomplication.
As you get more and more experienced as a cook or a chef, it's all about putting less on the plate.
I think here, you're gonna see people start trying to add every single thing possible, and we all know that that just muddles it.
I'm going to be making a honey bee cake with some crushed pecans on top with a honey caramel glaze.
It's gonna be beautiful, and I can't wait to present this to the judges.
I'm making a spicy gingerbread cake trio.
I live in a huge house with 13 people, and this is how we come together.
Let's go eat! I'm the only one that cooks.
My grandma don't cook.
My mama don't cook.
My auntie all she can do is boil water.
I am the cook of the family.
Excuse me, y'all.
My baby want her food.
To win MasterChef, it would mean a lot, because I have a lot of people riding on me succeeding, and I want to prove that to my nieces and my nephews that with drive and determination that they can do anything.
My confidence level in baking is, like, 2,000.
Ooh, that smells good.
Cutter, what do you do for a living? I'm a petroleum landman, sir.
So why are you here? It's an opportunity to go through a new door.
I've always taken opportunities in my life, you know, whether it be joining the military What'd you do in the military? I was a search and rescue swimmer.
Jumped out of helicopters for a living.
What are you making? So I'm trying to do a little cappuccino pudding with a vanilla whipped cream with some biscotti dipping chocolate on the side.
- Good luck, man.
- Thanks.
Appreciate it.
Astrid, how are you feeling? Nervous.
I don't bake, chef.
You've never baked? Mum of four, really? - No.
- Okay.
What are you doing? Lemon bars.
So what is that, a shortcrust? What's the flavor there, lavender, thyme? Lavender.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.
All right, sweetheart.
Good luck in there.
Have to win this one.
I definitely do.
I'll be kind of embarrassed if I don't.
I'm a bakery assistant from Queens, New York.
Cooking is my life.
I know that I'm good at it, and I know it's basically the only thing I'm good at.
Bon appetit.
Growing up in a small town, it sucked.
I love riding bikes.
I was the black sheep, and I didn't have many friends.
I got bullied.
It wasn't fun.
It definitely destroyed my confidence, so I'm trying to work on that still.
I'm here because I wanted to change my life, and I really think that this opportunity could do that for me.
What are you making? I'm making a chocolate pecan brownie.
So we know you're a bakery assistant, and we're thinking that maybe you have a big advantage today.
Yeah.
And look.
Wow.
You got a mixer on your thigh.
That's dedication right there.
Thank you.
Elizabeth, what are you making? I'm making a strawberry balsamic cake.
With a honey mascarpone icing in between.
I'm calling it a strawberry tall cake.
Who's gonna screw up tonight? - Leslie.
- Why leslie? Because he's 'Cause he likes to flap his jaws and not cook so much.
So he talks too much Talks too much.
- Good luck.
- Thank you so much.
Perfect.
You've now got I've never said anything to you, Elizabeth.
- Never once.
- Shh.
You want to get ugly? Let's get ugly.
You don't know where the hell I've been.
You [bleep] live in Malibu.
Oh.
You want to know why I live in Malibu, sweetheart? It's because I worked my ass off.
You know what work is? Okay? Shh, please stop yelling at me.
No, no, I got where I got because I work.
I know.
Oh, I worked so hard to get where I am.
Obviously your [bleep] wife works, and you don't.
Don't run your [bleep] mouth to me about where I live.
Figure out how I got there.
Earmuffs.
I worked.
You want drama? I'll give it to you.
You ain't [bleep] yet.
Leslie, what's going on? I've never even spoke to this girl, and they say all I do is talk, talk, talk.
Because I talk to other people and I don't talk to them, they're jealous.
Here's the thing: The oldest, one of the most mature.
Start showing it.
I apologize.
- I'm sorry.
- Pull this back.
I'm sorry.
Apology accepted.
Mmm, that is good.
The last 60 seconds, and for one of you, your last minute in the MasterChef kitchen.
Do not forgot what's at stake here.
Ah! Leslie's plate look at that.
Last ten seconds.
Nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
Stop.
Hands in the air.
Well done.
All of you.
After observing and tasting throughout the challenge, the judges now take one final look to determine which dishes stand out.
That was an intense 90 minutes, let me tell you, and there are some phenomenal dishes out there.
One of you will win a huge advantage in the next stage of the competition.
Would the following two people please bring up their dishes? Cutter Yes.
and Astrid.
I'm thinking, "Yeah," you know, "Here we go.
" I have a good shot at actually taking this first challenge.
We also want to see the dishes from another two home cooks.
Courtney and Big Willie.
I don't see Courtney as the baker, so when they call both of us together, it was like, "What is going on?" Like, all my confidence dropped.
There are four home cooks in front of us.
Two of you are in contention for the worst dish And two of you are in contention for the best dish.
The two worst dishes belong to There are four home cooks in front of us.
Two of you are in contention for the worst dish And two of you are in contention for the best dish.
The two worst dishes belong to Cutter and Astrid.
Time to taste them both and then decide which one will be going home.
Cutter, you're shaking your head.
I ain't gonna lie, chef.
The first time I've ever tried something like this, man.
I thought I did damn good on it.
Step up.
Show me what you got.
I did a play on a cappuccino with a coffee pudding and a vanilla whipped cream and some caramel and cinnamon on top.
You know what hurts me? A proper kick in the [bleep].
You stuck a MasterChef logo.
Trying to honor the show, sir.
Serious? Yes, chef.
So you got the paste cream there.
Whipped cream.
Whipped cream on top.
Underneath that, you got what? And then I've got caramel and cinnamon.
Come on.
Honestly? To anyone, it doesn't look like a dessert.
- Roger that.
- Man.
Do you know what "biscotti" stands for? No, I don't, sir.
"Bis" means "twice.
" "Cotti" means "cooked.
" So I flipped it.
No, you would normally you would cut these and then individually bake them again.
The whole concept of biscotti.
And that brings me to my point for the entire room.
This is the MasterChef kitchen.
Dishes have standards.
We're here to distinguish who has a future in this kitchen and who doesn't.
Yes, sir.
Thanks, Cutter.
Astrid, let's go, please.
Describe your dish.
Lemon tart with lavender.
That's raw, yeah? I imagine so.
You imagine so.
If something's not cooked, what would you do? You don't serve it.
Leave it in the oven.
I'm struggling to understand where we can go with you, because I don't think there's much potential.
I've never seen it like that.
This tiny, little corner looks cooked, so I know that pastry might not be your strength, but to win the competition, you need to be able to come in and understand, whether it's dessert or fish, how to still step up and make it happen.
Absolutely.
I think that you know, they're somebody that you can work with and show some ideas to.
Cutter, Astrid, unfortunately, for one of you, the journey ends tonight.
Between me an Astrid, I think I'm better than her.
I mean, it's nothing against her as a person.
I just think in the kitchen, I'm a better I'm better than her.
I don't want to go home.
I'm not ready to go home.
I came here to learn and to grow and to win that title.
The person whose journey will continue in MasterChef is Cutter.
Congratulations.
Back to your station.
Thank you, gentlemen.
- Cutter.
- Yes, chef.
Get a grip.
Astrid, you may have the passion.
We don't feel the desire.
Please take your apron off and leave the MasterChef kitchen.
- Thank you.
- Thank you.
Wow, it sucks to be eliminated, but at the end of the day, I understand.
I own it.
Maybe I should have read some more recipes and practiced baking, because that is my weakness.
Now it is time to taste the top two dishes of the night.
One of you will win a huge advantage in the next stage of the competition.
First, Courtney.
Tell me what we have here.
A honey cake topped with toasted pecans and a honey caramel on top of a mixed berry coulis with a vanilla whip.
I mean, it looks like a restaurant dish.
Did you use salt in anything? Yes, I actually put a little bit of salt in everything, including the whip.
It's really smart.
The honey can sometimes be so overpowering and sweet, and when you get those together, it's very harmonious.
- Thank you, chef.
- Good job.
Thank you.
Love the crunch.
Thank you, sir.
Honey can be too much of an overkill sometimes, and you got the balance absolutely right.
We would easily put that in any of our restaurants.
If that is a sign of what's to come, good luck to the people standing behind you.
- Great job.
- Thank you, chef.
Willie, bring it on up.
Describe your dish.
It is a spicy gingerbread cake topped with a orange coffee mascarpone cream and a spicy berry compote with cayenne pepper.
It's beautiful.
It's well-presented, small, dainty, shows a lot of finesse, and then there's you.
What can I say? Wow.
It's really, really good.
No, I'm very, very impressed.
Both by the presentation, the dimension, the flavor.
Thank you.
If I had to make one slight criticism, the contrast between the orange and the coffee is a little bit shocking to my palate, but great continuity, great effort.
Watch out for Willie.
He's here to bake.
That is amazing, 'cause it's alive.
It's you know, it's a party in my mouth, Willie.
Good job.
Thanks, chef.
Two stunning desserts tonight, but only one can be the winner and join us in the MasterChef pantry.
The person who made the best dessert Congratulations The person who made the best dessert Congratulations Courtney, great job.
- Well done.
- Thank you.
- Courtney, are you ready to see - Yes, chef? inside that amazing pantry? Yes, chef.
And on top of that, you are in for a huge advantage.
- Okay.
- Courtney, this way, please.
- Oh, my god.
- Good job.
- Thank you.
- That was delicious.
Seriously.
As the winner of the mystery box challenge, Courtney is in control of the first elimination test.
Welcome to the MasterChef pantry.
Courtney now gets to choose the dish that her competitors must cook.
This room is where the MasterChef competition is won and lost.
To win, you have to use every advantage that you get.
We've had our dessert, but now it's time for the main course, made with one of the country's most popular ingredients Ground meat.
Ground meat is probably something every American has cooked with in the past week, so we're asking you to choose between three classic American dishes.
Okay.
First up is something that is very near and dear to my Italian heritage The much loved meatballs.
Yes.
Every culture has their version of meatballs, Asian, European, latin American.
The meatball was a poor man's dish that has recently been elevated to superstar status on every menu throughout this country.
Next up, my favorite ground meat dish Meat loaf.
Yes! While meatballs are something that's used around the world, I think America's probably the only country that makes a gigantic loaf of meat.
So we want to see a meat loaf dish worthy of MasterChef.
Finally, the most popular ground meat dish in America, possibly even the world, hamburger.
Yes! Nothing says America like the classic hamburger.
Well, fortunately for you, Courtney, you don't have to cook in this upcoming challenge.
Yes! That's your first advantage for winning the mystery box.
Everyone is going to hate me.
For your second advantage, you get to choose which one of these ground meat dishes your competitors will have to cook.
I feel like I could change the entire game with my decision.
This is where it starts.
Plant the seed.
Wait for a bomb to go off.
Is it gonna be a meatball, the meat loaf, or the humble burger? I've made my decision, and I choose for winning the first mystery box competition, Courtney got some huge advantages.
The first advantage is that she does not have to cook tonight.
And for Courtney's second advantage, she got to decide what everybody else has to cook tonight.
Courtney now gets a third advantage, which she doesn't even know about yet.
There are 20 fierce competitors out there.
Only half of them will have to cook tonight.
Wow.
And guess who decides which ten are safe? Courtney, it's time to tell us who you'd like to save from elimination.
So first pick? I believe that later down in the competition, I can beat this person, and if I can't beat them, they'll do themselves in.
I'm saving Leslie, chef.
Leslie, head upstairs, please.
Thank you, Courtney.
The second person I'm going to save I've seen what they can do, and it's not very impressive to me.
That person is Jaimee.
Jaimee, wow.
I guess, thank you.
This is like playing chess.
She's a pawn.
Boom.
Go away.
I would like to save Gordon.
Gordon, let's go.
Elise.
Cutter, Francis.
Kira.
- Interesting strategy.
- Hmm.
And I would like to save Ahran.
Interesting.
Like, I should've really been the first person to be called, because me and Courtney were the top two people in the baking challenge.
I would like to save this person because I think it would be in my best interest to be on their good side.
Hmm.
Elizabeth.
You know, like they always say, keep your friends close and your enemies closer.
So as far as Courtney knows, we're besties.
I mean, personally, the 11 standing in front of us, clearly Courtney fears you the most.
You've got one pick left.
Who are you saving? I want to save this person because they want to win this as much as I do, and it would be fun to compete against them.
Christian.
I look around, and I said, "This is the top ten.
" We're the strongest competitors here, and that's exactly why she left us down here to cook.
Please go and join your friends, and I'm sure you're dying to give Courtney a big hug.
As I walk up to the balcony, I feel like a puppet master.
I'm holding all of the other competitors in my hands, and I'm going to play them like chess pieces.
Checkmate.
Okay, it's time to find out what Courtney chose for you all to cook in this, your first elimination challenge.
Courtney chose A stunning meat loaf.
I make a mean meat loaf.
Me and ground beef we go way back.
I got this.
To stay in this competition, You will have to cook us one stunning version of that amazing meat loaf.
Your one hour to make us the most amazing, incredible meat loaf dish starts Now.
Whoo! Do we have bread? Sweet potatoes.
Sweet potatoes.
I don't need Courtney to save me.
I know I'm good enough to get up on the balcony all on my own.
A lot of people do see me as a food snob, and I wholeheartedly embrace it.
Snobbery to me just means I've had better, and I expect better, and I will make better.
Fight like it's your last meal.
A magical meat loaf there's an art to it, right? Exactly, I mean, it can't be a giant meatball.
It can't be a hamburger formed into a square.
It's got to be its own thing.
What would you do? So I would do something modern.
I would line my mold with the bacon.
The actual mixture of the meat loaf Pork, beef, veal.
I love adding roasted mushrooms and also some garlic that's been toasted up and bread crumbs, but just enough to bind it.
I don't want a super heavy, dense meat loaf.
What do you think the biggest mistake that these home cooks will make with the meat loaf tonight? If they don't taste the seasoning Mm-hmm.
of the patty before they start cooking.
Make your blend, Get your seasoning in there, and then fry off a small amount before you bake it.
And then adjust accordingly, because you cannot season the meat loaf after it's been cooked.
Right.
Dan, what are you making, apart from a mess? I'm gonna go a little sort of Southern Asian.
I'm gonna go a little bit of bourbon, a little of fish sauce and ketchup.
Dan, you've got to keep yourself in the competition.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.
Okay, Stephani, how's it coming? You excited? Yeah, everything's going well.
Couscous, wow, that's interesting.
I've never seen that with meat loaf.
That's a bleu cheese cream sauce.
What are you doing with that? Putting it on top of my lamb meat loaf.
Wait, that's that's That's very nontraditional.
Have you ever made this before? No.
Are you out of your mind? I might be, but, you know, I'm trying to win, so Did you want to go home? I wanted you to taste my food.
I didn't want to be up there looking pretty.
I'm not just a pretty face.
I am here to win this competition and show America what I'm about, which is cooking.
In this elimination challenge, mystery box winner Courtney has selected ten home cooks to prepare an American classic.
A stunning meat loaf.
At the end of this challenge, at least one home cook will leave the MasterChef kitchen.
This is kind of new, this particular combo, but Higher risk, higher the reward.
Francis B, how are you doing? Good, chef.
How are you? Talk about your meat loaf.
Doing a short rib and lamb.
I'm gonna kind of put some cheese inside this too, so hopefully the cheese melts as it's cooking.
So you're putting cheese inside the meat loaf.
I was thinking about it.
I might not anymore.
- Good luck.
- All right, thanks, chef.
I feel that we all are pretty good down here, so I feel like she kept some of the strongest players down here.
I'm from Columbus, Ohio, and I'm a call center representative.
Welcome to my home.
I went to culinary school.
It's been my dream since I was a kid.
I didn't finish because of finances.
Winning MasterChef and the $1/4 million would give me the opportunity to finish culinary school, to live out my dreams.
I am the next MasterChef.
I'm just making kind of a A little Asian-style meat loaf with a mango glaze.
And I make meat loaf a lot, so I'm pretty confident my meat loaf I know it's gonna be juicy.
And I've never done this twist on it before, but I'm sure it'll be pretty good.
Let's go, boys and girls.
Good job, guys.
Good job.
Big Willie, how's the big meat loaf? It's pretty good.
What's the blend? It's ground pork and ground beef with cinnamon.
Ooh, that is good.
Whoo! I thought Courtney was sending a message to everybody.
She's not sending nothing.
She's just running her mouth.
I think you're sending a message.
- Thank you, chef.
- Good luck.
Less than five minutes to go.
What an array of meat loaf out there.
Dan Wu, I think he's going in an Asian direction.
Maybe do a hoisin glaze, some kind of oyster sauce.
I like that.
I'm excited to try that one.
Francis has a romesco sauce and some bok choy and also burrata going through the meat loaf.
And that's great, provided it can stick together.
Yeah, doesn't fall apart.
- Doesn't crumble.
- Exactly.
and for one of you, your last 30 seconds in the MasterChef kitchen.
Come on, baby.
Taste everything you put on a plate.
We want to see beautiful restaurant-quality dishes, guys.
Come on, guys.
Clean those plates.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one, and stop! Hands in the air.
Well done, guys.
Good job.
Great job.
Cannot wait to start tasting them.
First up, Francis.
I took a big risk doing something I've never done before.
I'm looking down at my dish, and it looks amazing.
Describe the dish, please.
It's a burrata-stuffed meat loaf using short rib and lamb, charred bok choy, oyster and mushroom caps on top of romesco.
When was the last time you tried meat loaf and burrata together? - Um, today.
- Wow, seriously? Yes, chef.
I saw it earlier.
I thought, "Mm, burrata? Why would you take that and stick that inside a meat loaf?" Bold move.
And it worked.
It's a dish that you just want to eat more and more and more.
Great job.
Well done.
Thanks, chef.
That's great.
You know, this is something that'd be screaming, like, you know, at home, "Mom, meat loaf.
Come on, mom.
Meat loaf now!" - Great job.
Thanks.
- Thank you.
Tell me about this.
So it's a romesco sauce.
Now, that is a MasterChef idea, taking a staple out of spanish food culture, making a meat loaf, stuffing it with burrata.
You're playing the game at a high level.
Thank you, chef.
Keep an eye on this one, guys.
Good job! Next up, Stephani, please.
So describe the dish, please.
It's an herbed lamb meat loaf.
It has couscous, pepper ribbons, and a bleu cheese cream sauce.
Bleu cheese and couscous, that classic combo.
Wow.
Yeah.
Oh, sorry.
There's no way on Earth I can swallow that.
Very dry combination.
I got lots of chili flakes.
Bleu cheese and chili, couscous and lamb.
Where are you going on this? Well, I took a risk, and, um - No.
- You don't like it.
H-o-m-e.
That's where you should be heading.
Wow.
Yeah.
Oh, sorry.
There's no way on Earth I can swallow that.
You don't like it? You don't cheese sauce with a meat loaf.
You don't serve couscous with meat loaf, and you've got this one so wrong that I cannot tell you enough.
Seriously disappointing.
Thank you.
I feel like crap.
I have never been told that my food is not good.
I just want to crawl under the nearest oven.
Next up, please, Whitney.
I glace over at Whitney's dish, and it looks pretty pedestrian, honestly.
Didn't look like there was a whole lot going on with her plate.
So tell me exactly what we have here.
Caribbean, Asian, Cajun style meat loaf.
I used some lemongrass, soy, some garlic and ginger, and also I have a sweet potato mash and green beans.
The issue I'm having is, the meat loaf itself has the mushrooms going through it and these other things, but it doesn't really taste like anything.
And I'm getting the sweet potato and then that sweet glaze, and it's just, like, honey and the mango.
That's all I really get.
It could be, like, a weird meat dessert creation somehow.
Okay.
I can't think anything worse to go in a meat loaf, Lemongrass and mango for the sauce.
The meat is dry.
It's way overcooked.
It's bland.
You know, you brought it up.
The first thing that came to mind for me was a tv dinner, But unfortunately, you've taken a tv dinner and turned it into a tv disaster.
My apologies - Chef.
- to the meat loaf.
Next up, Christine.
What do we have? It's a veal and pork meat loaf topped with a dried egg and some basil-fennel pesto.
The flavor of the meat loaf's awesome.
I love the pesto.
Not sure the egg is needed, but good job.
Thank you.
Jordan.
This is a pork and veal meat loaf with roast tomato and cream sauce.
Hmm.
You can't season the meat loaf after it's cooked.
It's impossible.
You know, you are the youngest guy in this competition.
Tonight, I think it shows.
Daniel.
We have a lamb and ground beef meat loaf served on top of sweet potato mash.
I like the roasted carrots.
I like the mushrooms.
I like everything about this dish.
Thank you, sir.
Next up, big Willie.
Um, Willie, describe the dish, please.
It is a pork and beef meat loaf with creamy mashed potatoes and roasted brussels sprouts with bacon and pine nuts.
The seasoning is absolutely spot on.
I mean, it's really good.
Even the sour cream in the mash, the black pepper, the caramelized sprouts.
You're a strong contender, Willie.
- Great effort.
- Thank you.
- Well done.
Next up, Dan Wu, please.
Thank you.
I think the plate looks beautiful.
There's some great colors on it.
I'm actually pretty confident.
So describe that, please.
It's ground veal, pork, and short ribs, some carrots, onions, shitakes, and then I've got a quick kimchi of brussels sprouts, swiss chard, and bok choy.
That is absolutely Disgusting.
The blend is way too wet.
Not a big fan of raw brussels sprouts.
That is one of the worst meat loafs I've ever eaten.
When chef Ramsay says "Your food is disgusting", it's the worst thing you can hear.
It's absolutely devastating.
Tonight, there were a few standout dishes, but there was just one dish that stood out just a little above the rest.
It used more than one kind of meat, and it had a very sophisticated sauce that really made it shine.
My meat loaf was perfect.
There's no competition.
I got this.
Tonight's best meat loaf I kind of, like, want to go ahead and just yell, because I know it's mine.
Belongs to Francis.
Congratulations, Francis.
You will have a huge advantage in the next challenge.
Thank you, chefs.
And now the three worst dishes.
At least one of these three will be leaving the world's biggest culinary competition.
The first dish had a bizarre choice of flavors that just didn't blend.
The texture was wrong, and it was just a ill-conceived dish.
Please step down here, Stephani.
The second dish was simply all over the place.
The next home cook tried to use exotic flavors that did not work.
Please step forward, Dan.
Being on the bottom three I'm not feeling great at all.
I let my ego get a little bit further past my ability.
This could send me home.
And the next home cook plated, quite frankly, a horrendous meat loaf, and it wasn't just the meat loaf.
It was the sides.
It was the execution of the plate.
Please step forward, Whitney.
None of you did a meat loaf justice.
One of you three will be leaving MasterChef tonight.
Please step forward, Dan.
Dan, you cooked out of control this evening.
You absolutely humiliated a meat loaf, and you got far too cocky for your own good.
I'm sorry That there were two dishes worse than yours.
Get a grip, get focused, and step up a gear.
I won't disappoint you guys again.
I promise.
Back to your station.
Congratulations, Dan.
Wow.
Courtney, do you know who we're about to send home and why? One of the most important things about food is passion and love, and I think that that person was lacking.
I believe you're going to send home Whitney.
Courtney, tonight you are consistent beyond belief.
Whitney, unfortunately your time is done in the MasterChef competition.
Chef.
Stephani, back to your station.
Whitney, food's about passion.
it's about energy.
It's about creativity and flair.
Tonight, you didn't bring that.
Please take off your apron, place it on your bench, and leave the kitchen.
Good night.
I'm also upset that I had to leave this early due to something so simple as meat loaf.
Even though I didn't win MasterChef, I'm gonna go back home, and I'm gonna continue working, saving up money so I can finish culinary school, 'cause I still want to finish.
Next time on MasterChef, It's the biggest Most explosive team challenge in MasterChef history.
Here they come! You don't realize what 500 soldiers looks like.
As the home cooks go to war Hurry up, guys! To feed American heroes.
Come on! And one more MasterChef hopeful is cut from the ranks.
Previously on MasterChef The best home cooks in America Welcome, welcome.
took their place in the MasterChef kitchen.
This is the coliseum.
But the very first mystery box came with an unwelcome surprise.
One of you will be going home.
What? From mystery box? Astrid, your time is done.
The elimination test delivered highs Pretty killer.
Keep an eye on this one, guys.
and lows.
You've taken a tv dinner and turned it into a tv disaster.
And Whitney became the second home cook eliminated.
Tonight it's an all-out culinary war Here they come! You don't realize what In the biggest, most explosive team challenge in MasterChef history.
They're [bleep] raw.
Come on! And then a pressure test threatens to send a favorite home.
Come on, you need to put that in the oven.
It all happens right now on MasterChef.
Our 20 remaining home cooks have been dropped off 200 miles from the MasterChef kitchen in the Mojave desert for their first team field challenge.
This is the first team challenge.
I'm big, I'm hot, I'm uncomfortable.
I mean, I could've been surfing in Malibu, and I'm going, "What in the hell?" I'm Scottish, in the desert.
What are we doing here? Are we gonna cook an egg on a rock? Look at that, yo.
Wow.
Oh, my god.
Suddenly in the distance, here come two bloody helicopters and two trucks just driving and flying towards us creating a massive sandstorm.
I was in the military, and seeing these helicopters come in brought me back to the days I used to jump out of helicopters for a living.
And, man, my adrenaline is just pumping right now.
It looks like some serious stuff's about to go down.
And, boom, it's the judges.
Right.
Everyone, listen.
You have a very, very critical challenge to undertake today.
Francis B.
Yes, chef.
Because you had the best dish in the last challenge, you will be a team captain.
Being team captain, first team challenge, I am up for this opportunity.
I can definitely lead this team.
Grab that.
Clearly captain of the red team.
All right.
Now quickly select nine individuals to join your team.
It's a huge advantage to get to pick your whole team right off the bat.
But Gordon's like, "Now, we gotta go.
" So I gotta put something together quick.
Hurry up, come on.
Time's of the essence.
Cutter, let's go! Tyler, come on up.
Tyler and cutter, I feel like, really know their meats.
Victoria.
Victoria, she'd know what to do with maybe side dishes or working the grill.
- Francis.
- In the truck! Francis L, he's quirky, he's funny.
He's a strong competitor.
Willie.
Let's go, big willie.
Willie, he can bring the finesse.
Come on, francis! Christine.
I'm playing out everything really quickly in my head.
Like, who would work well together? Who are the people I've seen do well in the challenges? Elizabeth.
Ahran.
One more, one more.
Uh, let's go, um Come on, Francis B! Kira, let's go.
Francis B, that's it.
All right! All right! That's our leader right there.
Hell yeah, dude.
The rest of you, you are the blue team.
Yes, let's go, blue.
Yeah! Let's go, blue! I'm looking around at my blue team, and I'm thinking, like, we're doomed.
We have no people that know how to work under pressure.
We have a lot of weak links.
You need to choose a captain now.
Now! Choose a captain.
Daniel.
Daniel.
I see enough eyes glance my way, and I hear the majority of people say "Daniel.
" - Who is it? - I'm the captain.
So I stepped up, and I raised my hand, and I was ready to be the team captain.
Blue team, get in the truck.
Let's go, come on.
- Hop on.
- Let's go.
This is colonel Ward.
I'm the commander of the 11th armored cavalry regiment.
This is colonel Braga with the U.
S.
army.
He's here to tell you more.
You're driving through the national training center, fort Irwin, California, one of the country's premier tactical training facilities.
Our brave men and women train here in an area that's roughly the size of Rhode Island.
Many of them are currently involved in live tactical ground and airborne training exercises as we speak.
You are all about to undertake a very, very important mission.
You'll be out of your element, and you will have to cook in the elements, in a field kitchen.
Today you will be feeding Wow.
Excuse me? Are you kidding me? Guys, this is almost an impossible mission.
This is more people than we've ever had home cooks serve in any challenge ever.
We want one grilled meat, one side, and an amazing sauce to go with that protein.
Listen carefully.
You'll have two hours to prep your meal and another two hours to serve it.
- Clear? - Yes, chef.
We got this.
My brother was a marine, And my dad served in Vietnam, so this is really important to me.
I really want to do right by these soldiers because of the sacrifices they make.
It's a big deal to me.
I couldn't think of a better group of people to honor and respect, because these guys are putting their lives on the line every day for my freedom.
Let's go, guys.
Let's go.
Let's go, let's go, let's go! The teams now have just two hours to prep a hearty meal for 500 soldiers, who will vote for their favorite dish.
Along with a side and a sauce, the teams have a choice of beef, chicken, or pork to serve as their protein.
What else we got? I think we should do the pork chops.
Pork chops? Yeah, I agree.
Let's do a spicy rub, sweet sauce.
We decide on a double-cut pork chop, which seemed like the cadillac of the meats, with an apple-cranberry sauce.
We need a side that's gonna sustain 'em, something that's gonna stand out.
- I think mac and cheese.
- Carbs? I think mac and cheese.
Yeah, bacon crumbles on there.
- Let's do it, guys.
- Yes! While Francis' red team quickly decides on a menu, over on Daniel's blue team, not everyone agrees on the choice of meat.
Chicken.
Chicken is easy.
I think beef.
Chicken you gotta cook all the way through.
My experience from cooking chicken on a grill for a bunch of people, chicken dries out too much.
It's a tricky protein.
Give me flank steak any day over a chicken breast.
I mean, that's a hockey puck in disguise.
Chicken with sauce, barbecue sauce.
- Are we thinking barbecue sauce? - Absolutely.
And once again, I felt like I wasn't there.
- Like a southern-style barbecue, yes.
- Like a texas-style.
Okay.
I cast a vote for chicken, and the majority said the same thing.
So that's what it was gonna be.
- Now, um, side dish? - Potatoes.
Potato salad would be rad.
Leslie, what are you doing? I'm just cleaning off the fat.
Whose idea was it to do chicken? - Everybody, yes.
- Everybody? - What was your idea? - My idea? I would've went with steak.
What do you think those soldiers would prefer, chicken or beef? I think beef, because if I'm out there, the last thing I wanna do is see a chicken come in.
I want a nice piece of beef and something really hearty.
That's my opinion.
It's my opinion.
These pork chops are thick.
They are thick.
- Take one, throw it on, start timing it.
- All right.
Guys, this is the biggest challenge ever.
Amazing, they're cooking for 500 U.
S.
Soldiers.
We've never, ever done these numbers.
This is double the biggest challenge we've ever had.
So this is like a whole nother level.
Red team is doing a pork chop and a bacon mac and cheese.
How can you make mac and cheese without an oven? There's no way to get a crust.
There's no way to do anything.
- It's gonna be like cheesy noodles.
- Mush.
Okay, but if you can nail a bacon mac and cheese, you will win this.
- No.
- You think? I say it's very challenging, but it's high risk, high reward.
We can cook off the pasta and hold it, but we gotta time it well.
The blue team, all-American menu.
Barbecue chicken with potato salad.
Well, first of all, I mean, wrong choice of protein for me.
Chicken is crazy, because to nail it and get it moist is very difficult.
Most likely, it's gonna be dry.
If you're gonna serve dry chicken to 500 soldiers, that sauce better be good.
Needs a little-- a little heat.
We got cayenne? We got jalapeno? Let me go check.
Red team, blue team.
left to go.
Almost halfway through their prep time, both teams begin the daunting task of grilling over 500 portions of meat.
All right, Cutter, what's going on, man? Going good, going good.
Getting the pork chops on.
Are you sure you want them that far from the heat? This is a giant, I can put my hands here, and there's, like, nothing going on.
This is, like, worse than microwaving them.
They're literally just in the steam.
- We need to get some more coals.
- You gotta get a flame going.
You gotta get it hot.
I am not concerned.
With Victoria, me, and Tyler on the grill, you know, me and Victoria from Texas, Tyler a country boy, we can make this work.
That's delicious rub, though.
That's great.
Thank you.
While cutter takes charge of the red team's pork chops, on the blue team, Leslie is panicking that Stephani's chicken is undercooked.
These are not done.
These are not done.
- They're not done.
- Oh, that one is.
- Yeah, no, no, no, no, no, look.
- It's just light.
- Okay.
- I know.
Leslie is driving me up the wall.
he's always in my face, running his yap, talking too much, and he really needs to back off.
It feels-- it feels soft.
It looks soft.
- No, that's good.
- Okay.
That's your station.
Do what you feel is gonna work.
The last thing you want is raw chicken, or otherwise you're gonna walk out with a lot of sick people here.
How many portions have you got cooked? Two pans in the hot box.
There's two in the hot box? Yes.
It's raw.
Hey, blue team.
Yes, chef? Pass me a knife.
Let's go! All of you, let's go! Stand over here.
Who checked this chicken? I did.
Raw.
Raw chicken.
Seriously? So you didn't cut the chicken open? You didn't check the chicken to see if it was done? None of that? This chicken right now is more [bleep] dangerous than the enemy.
Honestly, guys, get a grip! In the most ambitious challenge in MasterChef history, both red and blue teams race to prepare a meal for 500 hungry soldiers.
But just 45 minutes into their prep, Gordon discovers that Stephani's chicken is raw.
Honestly, guys, hey.
- We should be embarrassed.
- I am.
Stephani, I told you.
I may be 56, but I know what the hell I'm talking about.
I know raw chicken when I feel it.
Team captain, if she doesn't know how cooked chicken looks like, feels like, put someone else on the job.
Come on! You need to cover the tops with tinfoil.
Keep the heat in the grills.
Put some pans on top of it.
Long trays.
Not those trays! The longer trays.
I need those trays.
Put it on top of the meat.
Under 45 minutes until the cavalry arrives.
While the blue team attempts to rescue their raw chicken, on the red team, it's captain Francis' mac and cheese side dish that is in serious danger.
Stop.
Are you kidding me? How is that mac and cheese? So look, it's all separating.
Tossing in 4 pounds of cheese with 5 pounds of pasta and, like, 2 gallons of heavy cream, it just didn't all cook together.
Francis B, are you telling me that soldiers don't know the difference between mac and cheese and mac and [bleep]? This is not good, guys.
This is not good.
How's francis b doing as captain? - Headless chicken, - Really? Mac and cheese, didn't make a cheese sauce.
Just cold cream with grated cheese--shocking.
What's red team gonna do? Are they still gonna serve this mac? I just don't know.
Although I tried the rub, and it's quite good.
Have you tried a slice of pork? No.
Because there's not a finished pork chop yet.
You should probably have a hundred pork chops cooking by now.
Red team, blue team, just under 30 minutes to go.
Y'all, we need to get on it.
We need 20 pans.
I'm seriously worried about the red team.
I mean, they're behind massively.
Let's check these.
So the blue team, I think Daniel as an appointed captain, he's level-headed, good enthusiasm, made some good decisions.
Stephani, how you doing? - You got it together now? - I got it.
I think blue team's got it just because red doesn't have it.
Turn it up, you guys! Come on, let's go! With service rapidly approaching, Joe and Graham head over to the red team to check on the status of their side dish.
Coleslaw? What happened to the mac and cheese? We had to think of something else.
How many tubs are you guys gonna be able to fill? You gotta do 500 plates.
- Five? - At least.
So five tubs is about 150 of these.
And so far you're shaving about one every five minutes, which puts you - in bad shape.
- It does.
Good luck.
Keep on shaving.
Ten minutes to go! Soldiers are starting to gather, guys.
Look out on the horizon.
Here they come! They're coming! You see tanks, and you see helicopters, and you see all these people starting to gather.
You think you know what No, you don't realize what 500 soldiers looks like.
It's equal parts invigorating and mildly terrifying.
Victoria, how many pork left to cook? We have a lot, chef.
Hundreds.
Get that pork on.
Come on, speed up! At this point, if we can't get the team together and we can't get this dish onto a plate, we're truly buggered.
These are not ready.
This might be the biggest challenge or the biggest disaster we've ever seen on MasterChef today.
I need more plates.
Let's go! Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
Let's go, guys! We're open for business.
Hi, guys.
How are you? - Awesome.
- Thank you, guys.
Thank you so much for your service.
The MasterChef battle is on.
Each of the 500 soldiers will taste both the red and blue team's dishes, then vote for their favorite.
Here you go.
Pork chop for you.
The red team is serving a double-cut pork chop with an apple chutney and coleslaw.
Here you go.
Thank you.
The blue team is serving grilled chicken with barbecue sauce and a side of potato salad.
Let's go, hurry up, they're waiting, they're waiting.
Once that service starts, this whole thing turns into chaos.
I'm in the weeds on the grill.
The slaw is in the weeds.
My arms are physically about to fall off my body.
I need more pork chops on my side.
Francis, I'm trying, brother.
I'm a little bit worried.
Those pork chops are so thick, and it's slow getting them to cook.
Francis B, look at the line.
The line is backed up.
Come on, guys.
You guys, we're getting a big delay from the red team, So that means we're doing great.
As the red team scrambles to keep up with the endless line, Graham heads to the soldiers to see whose dish is winning hearts and minds.
- Hi.
- Hi.
What do we think, between the red and the blue? I like the blue better because the red was kind of tough.
It's kind of hard to get to.
I like the blue one better.
The seasoning is good.
The sauce is good.
I like the way that they presented it.
You guys, we are killing it.
Well, the red team's food, you can see that it's raw, not even cooked.
I don't know what else to say other than it's horrible.
That's not cooked.
That is not cooked.
Victoria, they're not done! They're not? No.
Hey, red team, get your ass over here! All of you! Look.
They're [bleep] raw! This is like my worst nightmare.
And as team captain, I know I'm screwed.
Team captain, my ass.
Raw pork to these guys, are you kidding me? We are in big trouble.
As far as I'm concerned, if we serve these troops raw pork, we should all go home.
Look at the respect you got for the soldiers.
Get your [bleep] together.
Hey, hey, guys, I'm gonna stop you here.
Get a [bleep] grip.
Having discovered raw pork being served to the soldiers, Gordon forces the red team to radically change their cooking strategy.
- Butterfly the pork.
- Yes, chef.
Look at Cutter.
Great idea.
Butterfly it.
That's a faster cook over time.
With the red team stalled and time running out, the blue team is quick to entice the hungry soldiers to their station.
We got plenty of chicken over here.
Yeah, if you guys want some barbecue chicken Wait, they're just walking by without plates.
We're happy to be able to feed y'all.
Three minutes on some pork.
We got so behind and so in the weeds, I'm not even sure how many people we missed.
I'm definitely thinking we could be in trouble.
Every time a soldier doesn't pick up your pork, you're losing a vote, come on.
Despite a large number of soldiers who did not receive a plate from the red team, those who did have strong opinions.
Definitely gonna vote for the red plate.
It was way better.
The best pork chop, say that again.
It's the best one I've ever had.
- In your life? - In my life, yes.
What's the feedback? I mean, the thing is everyone that got pork loves it.
I mean, if they could keep it consistent, I mean, they have a shot.
So I don't know if they're able to pull it back now or not.
But, I mean, their pork is good.
The blue team picked a less ambitious menu but at least were able to execute it.
Nothing went out raw.
I got pork coming out right now.
Good job on the butterfly, guys.
They're cooking great.
Hi, guys.
Thank you so much for waiting.
I need more chicken! Let's go! I'm sweating bullets.
It's so many people.
It's crazy.
Let's go, guys.
Come on.
Last 50 soldiers.
Come on, let's go.
Last 50 soldiers, you guys! Push it out! Come on.
Let's go! Let's go, cutter! Let's go! The chicken had a little spice to it, So I really liked that.
Let's go, red team! Red team, last soldier.
Let's go, guys! Make it look good! Thank you.
Yeah! I knew we had a winning dish.
But the only thing going through my mind is: How many plates did we lose, did we not put any food on? Thank you so much.
We rose to the occasion as a team, feeding 500 people.
And even though that sounded incredibly daunting, we nailed it.
With service completed, Joe heads out for a final check-in with fort Irwin's top commanders.
General, what is the opinion of our top dog? I think I'm going for the pork.
Going red, pork chop.
So general's going for the red.
Who's voting red on this table? Raise your hand.
One, two, three.
Who's voting blue? One, two, three.
Dead tie.
It's time for the vote.
When given the order, all 500 soldiers will line up in front of the team whose food they liked best.
The team with the most soldiers on their side is the winner.
Ladies and gentlemen, we would like personally to thank each and every one of you for your bravery and your service to this amazing country.
These home cooks cooked their hearts out, but there can only be one winning team.
Red team, baby! - Come on, baby! - Blue! Blue! Blue! On the count of three, please step into position.
One, two, three.
Come on, guys! Come on! Blue! Blue! Blue! Blue! Red team! Red team! Blue! Come on, blue! Come on! Look at 'em.
Look at 'em.
We're seeing them line up one by one, and it's looking like it's really close.
We got 500 plates, didn't miss one.
I feel really confident.
The winning team today, the team that is safe from elimination with 329 votes, congratulations to the red team! Thank you! Thank you! Thank you! Cooking for 500 troops and knowing that way more than half of them liked our stuff over theirs, it's ridiculous.
We put ourselves out there on the plate, and we worked really hard to get where we were at.
It was a huge win.
It was a landslide.
Blue team, that means you'll be facing the dreaded pressure test.
Clear down.
Let's go.
I was shocked.
Was their dish that significantly better than ours? Anybody can cook [bleep] pork chops.
I don't even know how they won.
They missed a lot of plates.
That doesn't make sense to me.
I'm really confused right now.
I'm not happy.
I am not a happy camper right now.
Red team! Red team! Welcome to the real world.
I'm pissed that the blue team's going into the pressure test.
The chicken was just a bad choice.
If they would've listened to me and chose the beef, we probably could have won.
We made a decision yesterday to commit as a team.
So we can be friends afterwards.
but while the pressure test is on, we gotta come out swinging, and you gotta knock each other out.
Yesterday we asked you to serve a heroic meal to over 500 brave men and women of America's armed forces.
Both teams fought valiantly.
But in every battle, there can be just one victor.
Red team, you overcame incredible odds to win the biggest challenge that we've ever done in the history of MasterChef.
Francis B, great job.
Thank you, chef.
Unfortunately, for the ten home cooks standing in front of us, you will be facing the dreaded pressure test.
At least one of you home cooks will leave the MasterChef kitchen tonight.
It's now time to face your very first pressure test.
But not all of you are going to have to compete.
Three of you will watch this pressure test from the comfort of the balcony, safe from elimination.
Daniel, you were big enough to put yourself out there as the team captain.
Now it's time to be an even bigger man and decide who's safe from this dreaded pressure test tonight.
I know I bust my ass.
I deserve to be on that balcony.
You know what you need to be doing right now.
You better think very hard.
Tell me your first person.
I believe this person worked very hard.
And nobody deserves to be up there more than Christian.
All right, Christian, up to the balcony.
You're safe from elimination.
Second choice? This person did a great job yesterday.
They were Johnny on the spot.
They were where they needed to be.
Gordon showed up.
Wow.
Please go up to the balcony.
Daniel, before you make your final pick, you can, of course, save yourself from elimination.
Tough one.
I chose to be captain yesterday, And a captain goes down with his ship.
So I'm gonna stay down here.
Wow.
I'm screaming to the heavens for joy, "Pick me, pick me.
" If anybody deserves it, it's me, because I did everything right.
I'm sending this person up to the balcony today because I don't want them in here with me today going head-to-head.
That person is Dan.
Off you go.
Are you kidding me? That was it.
Daniel made a big mistake not saving me.
I set my target right on his back.
At least one of you will be going home based on how you cook the dish that we are about to show you.
Blueberry pie.
Blueberry pie! You've gotta be [bleep] kidding me.
It feels like a tailor-made pressure test for me.
We're looking for one stunning blueberry pie, something worthy of this pie's amazing tradition in this country.
As you slice through that delicious pastry, you should hear that crisp crunch.
I don't bake.
If it had been the other way where they say, "Here's the dish, now pick three people, and you can save yourself," I would have gone upstairs.
Now, look at that filling bursting with that amazing blueberry flavor.
and a good pie filling always holds together.
When you do this dish justice, it is an absolutely perfect slice of Americana.
Okay, it's time to head to your stations.
Honestly, I don't bake a lot, so I want to show the judges that I think outside of the box and that I'm not your average home cook.
- Jaimee.
- Yes, sir? What is that on the side of your neck? It's blueberry pie.
So clearly this challenge was tailor-made for you.
I hope so.
You have 75 minutes to prepare and bake us a delicious blueberry pie.
You all have the exact same ingredients to make your blueberry pie shine.
You'll also have access to a limited pantry of ingredients that can help your blueberry pie stand out from the competition.
Right, your 75 minutes starts now! Go, guys.
Let's go, guys.
Looking at the seven that we have cooking right now, what are your predictions? I think, Jaimee-- tonight's her night to shine.
She's gonna show us what she has.
Elise, I think she overthinks it.
I think the minute she has a mistake, she sort of disintegrates.
With Stephani, the problem is she's gonna get into that pantry and start using everything, and it's all gonna go to hell.
Daniel chose to stay to cook.
Could you imagine if he goes home? Doesn't look too comfortable right now.
But the secret of a great blueberry pie, - obviously, the foundation is the pastry.
- Right.
That's the bit that sets the tone.
If you wanna make it your own, what do you add? Lemon zest, lime zest, So it's got that tangy effect.
For me, I think mint, just to steep and then take it out.
so it kind of perfumes it.
These things take at least minimum 45 minutes to cook.
Right.
So they gotta be in the oven the first 20 minutes.
I'm nervous.
I've already made judges blueberry pie once.
They weren't huge fans.
So if I can't get it right the third time, I'm gonna be really disappointed in myself.
Stephani, how you feeling? I'm feeling good right now.
What's your twist on this one? I'm throwing some pecans in the crust.
Have you done that before? I've never even made a blueberry pie.
They take minimum That means you have to get this in the oven in the next ten.
I got it under control.
Careful overworking that.
- Jaimee, how's it going? - Hi, guys.
- Good.
- So what'd you put in this? Blood orange zest.
Some blood orange juice.
Blood orange zest, good idea.
Very citrus-focused, huh? You chose to tattoo the blueberry pie to your neck.
Right.
It's like a homage to where I grew up.
You think that yours is strong enough to be the best here? I sure as hell hope so.
How's captain doing? He's restarting.
Daniel.
- Yes, chef.
- How you doing? The second time making a pastry? - Yes, chef.
- What happened to the first one? I got the mixture incorrect, so I had to start over.
Uh, that looks nice.
Yeah, knead it together, and then get rolling.
- Good luck.
- Yes, chef.
Thank you.
All right, guys, - just over 40 minutes left to cook.
You should have your blueberry pies in the oven by now.
I'm kind of nervous about Elise's.
She was running out of time.
She put the whole pie crust on top.
Is she the only one who didn't do a lattice top? Yes.
Slightly concerned about the texture of pastry of Stephani's.
See all these pecans? Risky to put pecans in the crust.
That's gonna be a nightmare to slice.
Daniel's 15 minutes behind.
He needs to get that thing in the oven, or he is gonna go home.
Just get it in there.
Everybody else has their pie in the oven.
Daniel, finish it and put it in the oven.
Get it in the oven, let's go.
Don't worry about it.
I might go home because my pie's not gonna get cooked in time, and there's not a damn thing I can do about it.
He needs to get that thing in the oven, or he is gonna go home.
Get it in the oven.
Let's go.
Don't worry about it.
Daniel, you need to put that in the oven.
What are you doing? Everybody has their pie in the oven.
- Come on.
- Yes, sir, yes, sir.
I'm the last one to get it in and by a pretty substantial margin.
Now I get to sit and watch and silently pray that my pie is edible by the time that clock expires.
Right now I think daniel's going home.
I think he got his pie in kind of late.
Revenge is sweetest when it's paid in the end.
And I'm a happy pie maker.
I'm nervous.
It's gonna be close for me.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
Hands in the air.
Well done.
Right.
Time to taste those stunning blueberry pies.
But more importantly, find out who's about to leave The MasterChef kitchen.
First up, Jaimee.
Explain to me exactly what your pie is.
I did an orange-scented blueberry filling.
it has blood orange juice, orange liqueur, and then a little bit of cinnamon, allspice, and ginger.
You have a slice of blueberry pie on your neck and "bake" written on your hands.
This had better be, like, the most life-changing pie of all time.
I sure hope it is.
The latticework is beautiful.
The overall flavor is awesome.
The floral component makes so much sense.
And the crust is nice and flaky.
You pretty much lived up to the tattoos.
- Good job.
- Oh, thank god.
That's impressive.
The orange aspect really lifts it up.
Your crust is perfect.
You certainly earned your ink today.
Good job, Jaimee.
Thank you very much.
The combination of the blossom water, blueberries-- Bloody delicious.
You've done yourself, the tattoo, the pie justice.
Thank you.
And you are now the most famous blueberry tart in New Jersey.
- Congratulations.
- Thank you.
Elise, please, let's go.
I know everyone's gonna be watching this pie, because I've made them several times, and everybody knows that I'm a baker.
So there is no failure option.
Describe the pie please.
Blueberry pie with mascarpone, lavender, brown sugar, and lemon zest.
Is this your lucky number three pie? - I hope so, chef.
- Okay.
You can see under there.
The pastry's raw.
It's almost like a pie's your nemesis.
I'm struggling.
There's way too much flour.
Undercooked base.
Young lady, it's like eating a mouthful of sand.
I'm lost for words.
Didn't really even cook.
You know, in a pressure test, it's right or wrong, and this unfortunately is wrong.
The only chance you have is somebody else being worse than yours.
Okay, next is Jordan.
It's a play on your basic everyday American blueberry pie, but add some lemon zest and also some brandy to deepen that flavor.
Does that white flour look like it's raw or cooked to you? Doesn't look very cooked.
Raw flour is one of my pet peeves.
Definitely like the lemon zest and brandy.
I can taste that.
Your crust is sloppy.
It's altogether a little sloppy.
Next up, Courtney.
I made a fresh blueberry pie with meyer lemon zest and a lattice crust.
The pie's delicious.
Great color.
Great crisp on the pastry.
Is there anything you can't do? I guess when we find it we'll all know.
Thank you.
Next up, Leslie.
Please, describe your dish.
It's a basic blueberry pie with butter in the crust and allspice, ginger, and cinnamon.
Wow.
It tastes awesome.
It's like an apple pie and blueberry pie crashed into each other.
Well, thank you very much.
I appreciate it.
Great job, leslie.
Leslie nails the pie.
He's been around for a while, so he probably knew Betty Crocker.
Next up, Stephani please.
Describe the pie.
It's a blueberry pie with brandy and cinnamon, and it's pecan-crusted at the bottom, and then it's regular lattice and pecan-crusted on the top.
Why so many pecans? But I know you're gonna taste a lot of blueberry pie today, so I wanted to just make it different and for it to stand out.
The pastry's crumbling like mad.
I'm struggling.
It's almost falling apart.
I've never made a blueberry pie before.
The pastry's undercooked, so it's doughy on the bottom.
But the big issue for me is that it is so sweet I wouldn't go near a second mouthful.
I think the only person in here tonight that would like that pie would be Elise.
Do you think this is better than Elise's? Considering that Elise is a baker, I think it is.
Thank you.
Thanks.
Okay, Daniel, let's go.
I'm looking at Daniel.
His crust didn't look like it was cooked all the way through.
This is my redemption here, man.
I want you to go home.
You're gone.
Talk about the pie.
I made a very classic, very simple blueberry pie, adding a tiny bit of ginger to the filling.
First of all, visually it looks unappetizing.
The lattice is uneven.
Pastry's literally falling apart.
So a huge crack on your pastry there.
Well, unfortunately, it looks like you've got one foot out the door, 'cause that looks bad.
First of all, visually it looks unappetizing.
The lattice is uneven.
The pastry's literally falling apart.
So a huge crack on your pastry there.
Well, unfortunately, it looks like you've got one foot out the door, 'cause that looks bad.
Wow, that came out better than I thought.
The pastry's a mess, but the acidity's right, the sweetness is right, and the actual filling is somewhat delicious.
Now how you blended that correctly I don't know.
Let's just call it a fluke.
Turn around, look at those six cooks behind you.
Is there any of those six, do you think, that would have made the same decisions you made today? I don't know about them, but I'm the only guy that looks at myself in the mirror every morning.
So I gotta be happy with the decisions I made.
I think your honor is better than your pie.
Unfortunately, for at least one of you, your journey ends tonight.
Could all seven of you home cooks please come down front? Would the following people please step forward? Jaimee.
Courtney.
And Leslie.
Tonight you three were absolutely top of the class with amazing blueberry pies.
As a result, you are all safe from elimination.
Yes.
Please head up to the balcony.
- Good job.
- Congratulations.
Daniel and Jordan.
Well, the bad news is you are both way off being the best tonight.
But the good news for you two is there were worse in the class.
Upstairs.
You're safe.
Good job, guys.
Way to pull through, daniel.
Elise and Stephani, both of you clearly had the worst blueberry pies.
Elise, your passion is your baking.
It is.
- Tonight I didn't get that.
- I understand, chef.
I'm horribly embarrassed about the product that I put in front of you three.
Elise is such a sweetheart, but I just don't think she has what it takes to be here.
Stephani, tonight you put a combination together that will never work, pecans in a blueberry pie.
Sadly, one of you is leaving us tonight.
It's embarrassing to fail at something that people know that you can do.
Elise, please step forward.
Elise, I'm sorry.
Your pie was bad.
We were expecting more.
Unfortunately Stephani's was worse.
Make your way up to the balcony.
Stephani, you made two big fundamental flaws.
Combining those pecans inside the dough didn't work.
The amount of sugar inside that pie was ridiculous.
I'm sorry, your journey ends tonight in the MasterChef kitchen.
Please take off your apron, place it on your bench.
Good night.
I feel very conflicted because I'm so happy to still be here.
But I am sad to see Stephani go.
This, for me, is really the first time that a friend has had to leave.
Today has been one of the hardest days.
Next time on MasterChef Keep your fingers back.
A mystery box challenge that's alive and pinching.
Excited now? And then an elimination test has an early front-runner It looks like a bomb has gone off in here.
on the run Do you have any extra yeast? - No.
- Nope.
- No, no more yeast.
- Goodbye, Courtney.
resulting in a shocking farewell that's hard to swallow.
What have you done? 
Last week on MasterChef It was all-out culinary war.
Turn it up, you guys! Come on! The red team won the battle, and Stephani became the latest casualty of the competition.
Tonight Keep your fingers back.
It's a mystery box that bites back and puts the home cooks in a pinch.
Then, the elimination test It looks like a bomb has gone off in here.
has an early front-runner in a tailspin.
Do you have any extra yeast? - No.
- Nope.
No, no more yeast.
Good-bye, Courtney.
Who will be leaving the kitchen next? What have you done? Find out right now on MasterChef.
Let's go.
I'm at the top of the competition.
If I'm not at the top, I'm, like, the top two.
I'm not afraid of anything that could come at me.
Congratulations for making it this far.
Give yourselves a round of applause.
Come on.
Unfortunately, Gordon little Gordon has fallen sick.
The good news is, he's gonna be fine, okay? But sadly, he's gonna be no longer a part of this competition.
Damn.
That means we are now down to 18 talented home cooks.
If you're looking to dominate the field, now is a good time to start with this upcoming mystery box challenge.
It's time to find out what's under those mystery boxes.
Please be careful, because it's live.
Aw, [bleep].
On the count of three, carefully keep your fingers back.
One I'm guessing, "Is it a snake? Is it a snapping turtle?" I don't want to get my hand cut off.
Two Three.
- Whoa.
- Oh, wow.
That's right, a net full of live seafood plucked straight from the ocean.
In those nets, you have crab, lobster, clams, phenomenal scallops, oysters, spot prawns, mussels, and a bit of seaweed.
Now, all of you, peel back your nets.
Francis.
What's the matter with you? Sorry, chef.
Oh, my god.
Everything's real fresh, Maybe a little too fresh for my liking.
Sorry.
Excited now? No.
- Yes, chef.
- Yes.
You'll also have the use of a limited pantry of amazing ingredients to complement that stunning seafood.
There's nothing more important for a chef than to know how to work with live seafood.
The margin of error on cooking these ingredients is very, very small.
Now, you'll each have 60 minutes to turn those stunning, incredible fresh ingredients into an amazing seafood dish.
Win this challenge and you can come into the pantry, where you'll get a huge advantage.
Is everybody ready? Yes, chef.
Your 60 minutes starts Now.
Whoa, buddy.
They're kicking, man.
The most intimidating mystery box ever.
Oh, whoa.
When has somebody had live scallops in their fridge? When have they had spot prawns kicking around? This is something that I think is so foreign to them.
As chefs, what would you do with this mystery box? Um, do you know what? I'd use all the heads The spot prawns, the shells of the crab, the shell of the lobster, and make a stunning seafood stew.
For me, I would stick to one ingredient, three scallops, but three different ways: Bacon-wrapped, poached, and I would do seared and basted in butter.
We're gonna see who can really rise up a level today.
Francis B.
How you doin', chefs? You're a server, so what kind of restaurant do you work in? A Southern, low-country style with European influences.
So just a little bit of inspiration there, but I want to put a little bit of myself in there too.
What are you making? I got some Middle Eastern spices going, So smoked paprika What's in here? Crab broth, a stock that I cooked with the clams and mussels in.
You know, this is what we want to see, in my opinion.
Hopefully it'll come together.
Good luck.
Christian, how are you feeling? I'm feeling great, chef.
So just think of all of New Orleans watching you absolutely nail this dish.
What are you doing? I am doing shrimp and grits.
What's the secret behind Christian's shrimp and grits? The sauce you can't eat shrimp and grits without a great sauce.
How are you gonna elevate those grits? I mean, you got to throw a little cream in there, throw a little cheddar cheese in there, top it off with a little bell pepper.
- Right.
Good luck.
- Thank you.
Just over 30 minutes left.
I'm making scallops and shrimp.
I'm gonna put 'em on top of a mushroom ragu.
I have never worked with live seafood before, so hopefully it turns out all right.
- Hi, Ahran.
How are we doing? - Hi.
Good.
Yeah? What are you going with? I'm making a spicy Asian-style seafood stew.
What shellfish did you use? I see some fish heads.
Oh, I for this, I'm gonna use scallops, crab, and shrimp.
Now, you're the youngest competitor that we've ever had.
You're also somebody that we haven't seen show themselves.
Yes, I definitely am reaching for the top on this one.
Who is the strongest cook in the kitchen right now? The person who's really proved themselves to be an amazing cook is Willie.
Like, from our side, we see Courtney as being kind of the front-runner.
You don't agree with that? Honestly, it's just a little bit of favoritism with her.
You're saying that we're favoring her? - No, I think - That's exactly what you said.
- She hasn't really shown - Oh, no, no, no, don't step back.
You said we're favoring her.
- Yes.
- Why would we favor her? I don't know.
She's a great cook.
It's a mystery box.
We're looking for the best three dishes.
At this point, who's really standing out? For me, I like the sound of Christian's shrimp and grits.
Beautiful.
And Courtney's stock and the broth taste delicious.
Again, really? Courtney's ahead of the pack again, huh? With Christian.
You know, for me, it's Ahran.
I think the complexity of the flavors and the use of all the different shellfish is pretty cool.
Francis B, he has a very, very profound fish stock.
The technique was perfect.
Flavor was perfect.
Really, really good.
Last two minutes remaining.
Come on.
Finishing touches.
Everything on that plate needs to have a reason.
Clean those plates.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one, and stop.
Hands in the air.
Well done.
Great job.
After observing and tasting throughout the challenge, the judges now take one final look to identify three standout dishes.
The winner of this challenge will then be in control of the elimination test.
Right, the first dish that we'd like to take a much closer look at was done with integrity.
The base was a phenomenal broth.
I deserve to be up there in the top three.
My dish is perfect.
And I'm looking around, and nothing else looks restaurant-quality.
They took full use of that bounty of seafood magic in that net.
I think that my food is better than Courtney's.
I want to show that, you know, I'm a good cook too.
Like, my dish is amazing.
It's beautiful.
It looks elegant, and I deserve to be here.
Please step forward The top 18 home cooks in America have been tested with a mystery box full of live seafood, and now, after 60 minutes of cook time And stop.
the judges will name the top three dishes.
We give you each a net tonight of the freshest seafood available.
It was almost like a chef's dream.
The first dish we'd like to take a much closer look at Please step forward Francis B, well done.
Let's go.
Having my name called again as one of the top dishes is awesome.
I'm feeling really proud, and I am really proud of my dish.
So I'm showing the other competitors they they got to watch out.
Thanks, chefs.
Talk me through the dish.
So I have a spicy seafood broth that I cooked down with the blue crab, mussels, and clams.
I used chorizo oil to sear the scallops.
Visually, it looks like it's come out of one of the top bistros in the country.
Talk to me about the base of the broth.
I tossed a blue crab in a tandoori spice, turmeric, and I cooked the shellfish down in sake.
Okay, here's the thing.
You've nailed the temperature on the scallops.
The clam's beautifully done.
And then you've got the sake, which is Japanese, with a tandoori spice influence at the beginning.
Middle East creeping in.
Normally, I'd call this fusion confusion, but this is fusion at its best.
Wow, there's a punch of flavor.
Pretty good job.
- Thank you, chef.
- Thanks.
So this is the most Certainly the most restaurant-y dish that we saw today.
And this ability to season so aggressively Where'd you learn how to do that? My dad loves to use a lot of spices.
He used to live in Morocco.
My mom lived in Italy, Rome, for eight years, so I feel like I grew up with a lot of good foods.
You hit the nail on the head.
This is like Morocco meets Rome in a plate.
You used the crabs smart.
I think that you're really firing on all cylinders with this.
Francis is one to watch, guys.
Good job.
Good job, Francis.
Whoo! Delicious.
Good job, young man.
The next dish that we would like to examine further Really highlighted the flavors and the personality of this person as a home cook.
Please step forward Ahran.
I'm surprised.
She's the youngest competitor here, and I'm interested to see what she puts on a plate.
I want to know what I'm up against.
So, Ahran, tell me.
What's the dish? This is a spicy seafood stew with bok choy, shrimp, clams, scallops, and rice.
I mean, it looks gorgeous.
- Thank you.
- Like, really beautiful.
The rice in the middle, the way it's all strewn about, it just it makes sense.
Wow.
It's so aromatic.
The spices that are in there just layered and complexity.
- Beautiful.
- Thank you.
You know, it's like all these different harmonies going together.
You made, like, a seafood boy band.
Great.
Good job.
Thank you so much.
So, Ahran, you didn't seem that intimidated handling all that seafood.
Watching you it was almost like you were sort of in your comfort zone.
It's, like, a flavor profile that I remember my mom making, so I tried to go off of that.
Wow, wow, wow.
You know it's delicious.
Thank you.
Underneath that little sweetie pie look, you can cook, young lady.
Thank you.
That has the base of possibly one of the best dishes we've ever had.
Great job.
Well done.
Amazing.
Absolutely amazing.
The third dish that we want to take a closer look at All ofts components seemed perct.
The flavors, the technique, the finished product taking me straight to the great city of New Orleans.
Oh, my god.
You know who you are.
Step forward, Christian.
Wow.
He really freaking called me.
Now y'all know I got a little flavor.
Now you know I'm one person that don't need to be reckoned with.
Describe your dish.
Today I prepared for you guys a New Orleans creole barbecue shrimp with grits, lemon zest.
I put a little cream in there, little cheddar cheese and bell pepper.
This looks like a very homey dish, you know? It has a lot of flavor.
It's very punchy.
It succeeds in being both rich but light at the same time.
Being around my mom and definitely being in the city of New Orleans has taught me so much on creativity and just cooking from within.
This is the type of dishes I definitely cook for my fiance and also my family.
It really tells a story of where you're from, and I think that you put a little bit of New Orleans in the plate.
- Good job.
- Thank you.
- Christian.
- Yes, chef.
There's something quite magical watching you work.
You seem to work twice as fast as anybody else.
You put so much energy into it.
Grits don't look that good on a plate.
You've managed to make them look glossy, smart.
This is good, let me tell you.
It may sound plain, but it tastes delicious.
Shrimp just the way you cooked them was brilliant, but the sauce, for me, lifts it.
That's the bit that's a bit like you fiery.
- Good job.
Well done.
- Thank you.
Um, interesting.
Very interesting indeed.
Wow, tonight three stunning seafood dishes.
Well done, Francis B, Ahran, Christian.
In a league of your own.
There can only be one winner.
I want this so badly.
Winning this will show the other competitors that I'm not just the youngest one here.
I'm one of the best ones here as well.
That individual will join us shortly in the pantry and receive a big, big advantage in the next stage of the competition.
Right now, it's time for me to show the world that, "Christian, you're meant to be here," and having an advantage will give me the opportunity to knock out some of the competition that I have.
The person who cooked the best seafood dish and will get that huge advantage in the upcoming elimination challenge The name of the game right now is to stay on top.
Seeing the other two dishes, I'm confident, and I know I'm gonna win this.
That dish was cooked by Congratulations Wow, tonight three stunning seafood dishes.
Well done, Francis B, Ahran, Christian.
Great job.
There can only be one winner.
The person who cooked the best seafood dish and will get that huge advantage Congratulations Ahran.
Well done.
I'm literally in shock.
Like, now I know that people are definitely watching out for me, and they realize that, you know, I could be the wild card here.
Maybe I'm the one who really has a ton of tricks up her sleeve.
Young lady, you may be the youngest in the competition But by means one of the most feared.
Thank you.
Are you ready to come to the pantry? Yes, chef.
Let's go.
Great job.
Well done.
Brilliant.
Absolutely incredible.
- Well done.
- Thank you.
Welcome to the MasterChef pantry.
The winner of the mystery box is now in control of the elimination test, where at least one person will leave the competition.
First of all, congratulations.
You are the youngest contestant ever in this entire competition to be in the pantry.
Well done.
Thank you so much.
So this pantry is where the competition can be won or lost, and right now, you, my friend, are in the driver's seat.
The theme of tonight's elimination challenge is - delicious sweet treats.
- Wow.
First up is something delicious that millions of people start their day with, perfectly baked golden brown muffins.
Wow.
You can have so many different flavors.
You need to get the crunch on the top with the soft, baked deliciousness underneath.
Next up, one of the most popular sweets eaten in America.
Everyone loves them, and they go great with a glass of milk.
Ooh.
Delicious cookies.
Oh, my gosh.
In this jar, there are a dozen perfect, delicious cookies.
Everyone knows how to make a cookie, but few know how to nail them perfectly.
I love cookies.
Finally, I'm about to show you one of the country's most favorite treats.
There are thousands of stores across America that sell these.
Perfectly fried and delicious, all-American, beautiful donuts.
Look at them.
They can be glazed, filled, have different flavors.
The sky's the limit, as long as they're delicious and perfectly cooked.
Yes, chef.
So, Ahran, because you won the mystery box challenge, you are safe from elimination and will not have to cook tonight.
Thank you so much.
But you will be choosing which of these three sweet treats everyone else will have to bake.
So, Ahran, who do you want to take out of the competition first? Honestly, I want to take Courtney out of the competition.
Why? Maybe because I go to high school and I deal with a lot of fake bitches all the time.
I just I can sense something from her, and I don't like it very much.
Do you think you can take her out? I definitely think I can take Courtney out.
Interesting.
So, Ahran, which of these items are you gonna choose for everyone out there to cook? I'll choose Back in the pantry, Ahran got some huge advantages.
The first advantage is that Ahran does not have to cook in this elimination challenge.
and for her second advantage, Ahran got to choose what everyone out here has to cook tonight to save yourselves from elimination.
You're gonna love this one.
Ahran chose Donuts! A dozen beautiful, delicious donuts.
All right.
Donuts I'm like, "Damn it, donuts are tasty.
They're good," but it's so technical.
I mean, if you kill that yeast, you're screwed, you know? That's the end of the game right there.
Tonight, we want to see served in a box, right, Ahran? Yes, chef.
Donuts are not easy.
You have to get those toppings and fillings just right.
They have to be beautiful, but also perfectly flavored.
Okay, you have 90 minutes to make us one box of 12 incredible donuts.
For at least one of you, this will be your final challenge in the MasterChef kitchen.
Is everyone ready? Yes, sir! Your 90 minutes start Now.
- Where's shortening? - Over here.
Coconut.
The last time I made donuts? Never.
Sugar, anybody seen the sugar? I start filling my basket like crazy, every ingredient under the sun, and immediately think, "12 flavors.
" It's go big or go bigger.
Donuts never underestimate that dough.
I mean, it's absolutely difficult to nail.
You've got to scald the milk.
There's an enzyme in there that'll actually destroy the yeast, and you need that dough to almost double in volume.
Once you've combined those ingredients, you cannot adjust after that.
Once the dough is done, it's done.
So who's gonna be eliminated is being decided now as they mix these ingredients.
First ten minutes.
I'm kind of feeling a little bit of pressure right now.
I've been in the bottom two before, and it sucks.
I do not want to be there again.
Oh, that's good.
Looking good.
[bleep].
Does anybody I'm screwed.
Just start over.
I'm remaking my dough because I forgot to add eggs to it.
I have to start over, all over, right now, and I don't have any yeast.
Elise, did you grab any extra yeast? No, I'm sorry.
I only got the two.
Francis Biondi, did you grab any extra yeast? No.
Do you have any extra yeast? One packet, two packets? I don't see any.
I'm basically shouting down the line to anybody that might have yeast, and no one will give me anything.
Did you grab any extra yeast? Nope.
Even if I had yeast, it's highly unlikely that I'd give it to Courtney.
Do you have any extra yeast? No, no more yeast.
I see Courtney running around like a fool, and all I can really think is, "My plan's working.
good-bye, Courtney.
" Do you have any extra yeast? Sorry, honey.
I'm [bleep].
Does anybody I'm screwed.
Francis Biondi, did you grab any extra yeast? No.
Do you have any extra yeast? You cannot make donuts without yeast.
Right now, I'm screwed.
Did you grab any extra yeast? Nope.
I might as well just turn around and walk out the door.
Do you have any extra yeast? No, no more yeast.
Okay.
Francis.
- What? - You have the whole kitchen in here.
Do you have any extra yeast? I love you.
Thank you! Honestly, Francis? What the hell? You just messed with my plan right now.
No kissing Scottish Francis! I'm so grateful.
You better rise.
It's not going too well.
These donuts did not rise like I thought they would.
God, I hope these work.
I look around, and everyone's has risen.
Mine are flat.
They look like little flat tires.
First thing I think I was like, "Let's roll these into a ball.
" At least it'll fry.
everybody must have their donuts rising.
Should now start cooking your donuts and finish them off with stunning flavors.
That's what we're looking for.
Kira, how are you feeling? - Terrible.
- Teible, why? I forgot to melt my shortening in with my milk.
Seriously? That's the basics.
The issue now it may be too dry, so then maybe adapt your filling.
- Yeah.
- We're looking for a master chef, yeah? - I know.
- Not someone who flakes under pressure.
- I know.
- Good luck.
Okay, thank you.
Francis? What's going on? I have 12 flavors.
I have pina colada.
I have three chocolate.
I have a stout with prosciutto and maple syrup.
You know we're only going to taste one donut, right? - Yes, chef.
- Are we gonna see 12 perfect donuts? - Yes, chef.
- Hope so.
All right, Francis B.
It looks like a [bleep] bomb has gone off in here.
- Where are the donuts? - They're right here, chef.
I'm trying to make them look as pretty as possible.
Donuts? They look like meatballs.
They're my take on the donut hole, I guess.
What's all this here? That's the extra dough from what I cut.
But what have you done? How do we come back from this? I know I have the flavors, chef.
- Don't give up, okay? - I won't.
Focus.
Let's go.
Just get these filled.
Hoping my chocolate will reconstitute back, but it's always a chance of going home, so all or nothing, right? Right, Leslie, how are you doing? Unbelievably well.
Why are you so confident about these? Because they look good.
They look really nice.
How are you gonna decorate these last two? Same like this little macadamia crust going down on there.
Where did you come up with these ideas? I think I may have done this in another life.
You are definitely a [bleep] donut.
Ten minutes to go.
Good luck.
I am a donut.
Love it.
So we asked for a box, 12 donuts.
I'm seriously worried about Scottish Francis.
I mean, why would Francis be making 12 different flavors? He's thinking about the aesthetics first as opposed to nailing a stunning donut.
Did Kira forget an ingredient? She added shortening later.
So she didn't mix it properly.
Boo-ah.
Leslie has been the big shocker tonight.
They look like they just come out of the best donut store No.
I promise you.
I kid you not.
Francis B, on the other hand, is in disarray.
You got these donut balls and half the size of the box.
I mean, they'll be rolling around crazy.
His are gonna look shocking.
Last two minutes.
to keep you in the competition.
What flavor are you on, Francis L? A new one.
A new one.
Tidy up your boxes.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one, and stop.
Hands in the air.
Well done.
- Good job.
- Good job.
Well done.
Amazing.
Okay, listen carefully.
Ahran, you now have one more huge advantage.
You get to come down off the balcony and take a walk through the kitchen.
You will then select a box of donuts and take that home cook up to the balcony, safe in tonight's dreaded elimination.
Wow.
Oh.
So, Ahran, please come down and look at those donuts.
So if Ahran doesn't save me, I'm going home.
That's what's happening, so I'm just praying she saves me.
I need to be really strategic and really think out who I'm gonna save.
I know that I can either save someone that I genuinely like as a person and I want to keep around, or I can save someone that I think might be going home and I want to save them because I think I can beat them in the end.
I'm just thinking in my head, "Man, don't save Francis B.
" He is serious competition.
Let him go down.
My heart's racing.
I'm just hoping that Ahran feels really bad for me and saves me so I can live one more day.
Wow, this is fascinating.
Chef, the person I'm gonna save today is Francis B.
Francis B.
You have dodged the biggest bullet in this competition so far.
Ahran, take the box and Francis B up to the balcony, please.
I want this competition to really be amongst the best home cooks so when I win MasterChef, I know that I did it through beating the strongest chefs rather than the weakest ones.
Francis B, how are you feeling right now? I am very relieved, and I know owe Ahran big time.
Okay, first up, Courtney, let's go.
If you forget the most important ingredient for donuts, then you're kind of stupid, and you should go home.
I want to get that girl out of here.
First of all, no heels.
I had to do a lot of running today.
Right, let's have a look.
Wow.
So what have you got in there? A raspberry frosted donut and a chai glaze on the other.
The dough aerated.
Nice and crispy outside.
They're salty.
That's seriously salty.
Please tell me you didn't put salt in place of sugar.
That is a mistake.
I did not purposely put more salt in there.
I can tell you it tastes weird.
- Yes.
It's like you've lost your heels.
You lost your mojo.
You've peaked.
You won the last dessert challenge.
Is that you now on the descent? No, I did hit a large bump.
I picked everything up and kept going and It sounds like you're sliding down the aerial faster than you got up there.
- What a shame.
- I'm sorry, chef.
The actual donut, the dough itself, I think is a little firm.
It's not that light, fluffy kind of donut.
The technique is just not what it needs to be.
What's this topping? A raspberry and blood orange icing.
How'd you let the salt slip? It had to have happened when I was just rushing to get the second batch of dough.
It's hard for me to love these donuts.
It's hard for me to even like them.
I'm sorry, chef.
Clearly her little miss perfect streak has been broken, Because her donuts taste like [bleep].
They're salty.
It's not that light, fluffy kind of donut.
It's hard for me to love these donuts.
It's hard for me to even like them.
Next up, Leslie.
What is in that box? Malibu sunshine.
Malibu sunshine.
Here we go again.
Wow.
OMG.
That's what I call a box of donuts.
Visually, it looks stunning, let me tell you, But what do they taste like? The donuts themselves, they're just plain with orange liqueur and orange sugar on top, and these have blueberry with pistachio, coconut.
Raspberry with macadamia nut and coconut.
Wow, they're perfectly shaped.
Crisp on top.
They're like a vintage, delicious donut.
I mean How'd you make a donut that delicious without even having a filling in there? The topping is zesty, vibrant.
I guess I'm good at winging it.
I don't know.
Right now, everybody standing behind you has got something to learn about how you can perfect a bloody donut.
- Great job.
- Thank you very much.
Amazing.
Wow, well done.
- Thank you.
- Good job, Leslie.
I'm finally at the top of my game over donuts.
Who would've thunk? I mean, just, like, "Really, donuts?" I have to pinch myself.
The next box of donuts, Kira.
Okay, Kira.
Ready? Yeah, open 'em.
Boom.
Not too bad at all.
I have four raspberry jelly donuts with dark chocolate, Banana with milk chocolate and maple ganache, and then plain glazed with lemon zest.
Very aesthetically pleasing and consistent.
I'm gonna try the filled jelly donut.
Okay.
Oh, I guess there's not too much filling in that donut.
- Where's the filling? - I don't know.
Did you put filling in there or not? Yeah, I squeezed it in.
I don't know where it went.
I'm sorry.
- Hmm.
- You don't like it.
These are not filled at all.
These are more like kaiser rolls than donuts.
Uh-oh.
All right, the next home cook, Victoria.
All right, moment of truth.
They're pretty uniform in shape.
That looks like a donut that you'd be able to go down and grab from pretty much any donut shop.
- Thank you.
- It's light.
This is, to me, one of the best that I've had in its simplicity.
- Thank you very much.
- Good job.
Thank you.
Next up, Christine, please.
Let's go.
Visually uneven.
We've got slanted ones, some perfect looking ones, and some ones that look like you've sat on them.
What's inside? Chocolate, hazelnut, mascarpone cream.
The flavor's there.
The dough's great.
Those finish touches I expect now to be a little bit more of a higher standard.
- Thank you.
- Thank you.
Next up, Daniel.
So I'm looking at 12 incredible donuts.
Let's hope so.
Where'd you go to school? I went to art school.
- You got - That's 16.
That is 16, yeah.
All right, I'm gonna pick one.
You, sir, are a beast with the sugar and yeast.
That's very good.
- Thank you very much.
- Great donut.
Well, well done.
Thank you, chef.
Next up, Scottish Francis.
Let's go.
What's inside the box? Wow, look at the colors in there.
I haven't even tasted them yet.
I'm tripping out.
Which one should I eat? I would say the prosciutto with guinness and maple syrup.
It's bloody amazing.
It almost looks like a bagel with those toppings.
Why prosciutto on a donut? I think the salt was a great contrast to the stout and the maple syrup.
- It's delicious.
- Yes! It's seriously good.
It's crispy.
It's sweet.
Prosciutto, salty.
I just want to eat more and more of it.
Very unique, just like you.
- Long live Scotland.
That's what I say.
- Absolutely.
Great job.
Thank you, chef.
Yeah, Francis! It's great to finally be recognized, you know, especially coming from someone I idolize.
I just wish he'd shoved another bite of every one in his mouth.
The next donuts we'd like to taste Please step forward, Cutter.
All right, Cutter.
Let's take a look.
What are they? I made a chocolate peanut butter donut and a white chocolate and strawberry donut.
They're small and uneven, and your chocolate glazing is broke.
What's the filling? Dark chocolate and peanut butter.
Dark chocolate and peanut butter.
All right, let's see.
Oh, no filling.
What happened? I don't know, I thought I had it all the way in there.
I squeezed the bag.
is that, like Was that part of your imagination, the filling, or did it actually happen? No filling again.
I mean, wow.
I have no excuses.
You certainly don't.
I mean, especially for the fact that you come here and you tell you're gonna give me a filled donut.
I don't even know what this is.
What's the filling? Dark chocolate and peanut butter.
Dark chocolate and peanut butter.
All right, let's see.
Oh, no filling.
Was that part of your imagination, the filling, or did it actually happen? - No filling again.
- I mean, I have no excuses.
- You certainly don't.
- Yeah.
Right on.
So bunch of technical errors.
On the flavor, they're not you know, they're not terrible.
They're not the worst donut Yeah, I thought my peanut butter was pretty awesome.
- It sucks.
- Yeah, it does suck.
Desserts, man.
- I might be worried.
- I hear you.
I am.
Okay.
Tonight there were some delicious donuts made by some very talented home cooks.
Unfortunately there were some disasters that we never expected.
Right now, we need a moment to discuss who's leaving shortly.
Well done, Leslie.
Congratulations.
I would've liked to have tasted yours.
you have all the flavors I wish I could have.
How good were Leslie's? Leslie's was incredible.
Amazing.
You're in a whole nother league.
Scottish Francis I thought was imaginative.
I loved that he was able to pull 'em off.
The saltiness of Courtney's was terrible.
Kira, the dough was way too thick.
Yeah, it was very, very thick.
No piping.
Cutter had no filling in his either.
- Okay.
- Oh, here we go.
All right, everyone, there were two standout boxes of donuts.
The first home cook that we would like to congratulate took a big risk tonight, Well done, Francis.
Anyone who's playing it safe today, they should've gone home.
That should be the rule.
Anyone playing it safe, go home.
The other box of donuts, which will be tonight's winning box, Was 100% sunshine in a box.
Silver fox, Leslie.
Good job, Leslie.
Thank you.
Congratulations, you are both safe from elimination, and you will both be team captains in the next challenge.
Nice.
And now for the bad news.
There are three home cooks we'd like to bring down to the front, and one of those home cooks will be going home.
The first home cook brought us donuts that looked much, much better than they tasted.
Please come down here, Kira.
The next home cook that failed tonight, they've been down here before.
Cutter.
The third terrible box of donuts underwhelming by a mile.
Clumsily put together, bit of a surprise.
Courtney.
Kira, Cutter, and Courtney, three disappointing boxes of donuts.
One of you will be leaving MasterChef.
Cutter, please step forward.
You have wowed us inside this kitchen, but tonight, you let yourself down big time.
Yes, chef.
Cutter, please take your apron and yourself back to the bench and get a grip.
Yes, chef.
In any competition, you don't ever want to be in the bottom three.
I've got to slow down and just be more focused for next time, because I'm here to win and I'm here to take everybody down.
Kira, we're struggling to see the passion.
Tonight's donuts may have looked visually appealing, but honestly, there's nothing more frustrating than biting inside and just feeling ten times more let down.
I have passion.
You haven't seen me do anything miraculous yet, but I have it.
I can show you.
Courtney, you shocked us on many occasions, delivered magic at times over the last couple of weeks, but then tonight's performance not just lacklust, but one of the most stupid combinations.
with that level of salt in the dough, it just killed our palates.
My whole future is at stake right now.
This is about making a better life for myself, and I know I can do better than this.
I just need a second chance.
The person leaving MasterChef tonight is Kira.
Say good night to Courtney.
Please put your apron on your bench.
Your time is done.
- I'm sorry.
- Okay.
- Thanks, guys.
- Thank you.
It was great.
Thank you very much.
I feel really sad, because I thought there was so much more I could bring to the table, and I'm gonna miss it.
but I'm very proud of myself.
Bye, everybody.
No matter what, I'm still gonna be on top of what I want to do.
You know, I hope that people don't see the last of me.
I hope it's only my beginning.
Next week, love is in the air for a MasterChef wedding.
Guess who'll be cooking all the food.
It's you.
But it isn't long before the home cooks I need everybody here right now! are filing for divorce.
I don't know how else to put "sorry.
" You're not sorry at all! I'm not gonna stand here and be abused.
And the pressure test sends another hopeful packing.
How the hell are we supposed to pull this off? 
Last time on MasterChef the home cooks faced a mystery box challenge that was alive and pinching.
Ahran's victory Possibly one of the best dishes I've ever had.
gave her the chance to save Francis from certain elimination.
- You've dodged the biggest bullet.
- I know I owe Ahran big-time.
As a result - Your time is done.
- it was Kira who was sent home.
Tonight, love is in the air for a MasterChef wedding.
Guess who'll be cooking all the food.
It's you.
But it isn't long before the home cooks are filing for divorce.
I don't know how else to put "sorry.
" - You're not sorry at all! - I wasn't liked from day one.
I'm not gonna stand here and be abused.
And one more hopeful leaves the MasterChef kitchen.
How the hell are we supposed to pull this off? The remaining home cooks have landed on the picturesque coastline of southern California, where they will battle it out in an intense, high-stakes team challenge.
I've been cooking my whole life.
I cooked pretty much to save my life.
I lost almost 100 pounds when I was 14, so all that practice and that knowledge that I obtained cooking makes me know that I can be the next MasterChef.
This is definitely a step up from the army base because I see beautiful beaches and scenery.
I'm wondering, are we, like, cooking for maybe surfers? Good to see you all.
Come on down, guys.
The three judges are standing under this beautiful frame of fabric and flowers, and I'm like, "Oh, my god, this is somebody's wedding.
" - Good morning.
- Good morning, chef.
- How are you feeling? - Great! - Look at this stunning location.
- Beautiful.
- Beautiful.
Now, in under two hours, there will be a wedding in this very spot between a stunning bride called Joplin and a handsome groom Mike.
And I bet you can guess who will be cooking all the food for their amazing day.
- Us.
- That's right.
It's you.
We are catering a wedding.
It's so exciting but also terrifying because there's a lot of pressure to make this amazing.
You'll be responsible for feeding Joplin and Mike's 120 guests on the most important day of their entire lives.
They want the theme of their wedding to be upscale ocean fare.
The bride and groom want a scallop appetizer and a sea bass entree.
It's up to each team to decide what to do with them.
Everyone will have two hours to prep and cook your dishes.
We'll get feedback from the bride and groom and their guests, but ultimately, it's us who will be deciding which team has won this challenge and which team will be facing the dreaded pressure test and elimination.
Leslie and Francis L, because you made the best doughnuts in the last challenge, today, you will both be team captains.
Please, come up here.
Leslie, because you had the best doughnut in the last challenge, you get to pick first.
Well, this person proved to me his leadership skills are right on the money.
He knows how to follow direction.
Christian.
Christian.
Wow, let's go.
Right, Francis.
I'm gonna pick this person because you have to have fun in your kitchen, so I'm gonna choose big Willie.
Big willie.
Wow.
Leslie.
Francis B.
Francis B, let's go.
- Francis L.
- I'm gonna choose Courtney.
Choosing my team is so important.
It's like a chess game.
- Leslie, third pick.
- Tyler.
It's like making his choices for him.
I know what he's gonna choose already Cutter.
And I know it's gonna cause chaos in that kitchen.
Daniel.
Daniel, come on down.
Francis L.
- Victoria.
- Leslie.
Christine is my next person.
- Next up.
- I'm gonna choose Elizabeth.
Wow.
Okay, Leslie.
I do not want to be on Leslie's team.
He does not know how to communicate with people.
"Iran.
" - It's Ahran.
- "Iran," I'm sorry.
- Ahran, Ahran, Ahran, Leslie.
- Ahran, I'm sorry, I apologize.
I apologize.
I'm sorry.
And of course, I get picked to be on Leslie's team.
- Francis L.
- Dan.
Dan, wow.
Let's go.
Leslie.
- Jordan.
- Last pick.
Francis L, you're picking for both teams.
- I'm gonna choose Elise.
- Thank you.
- Wow.
I'm used to this.
You would not be my last pick, let me tell you.
Please, join Leslie's team.
Thank you.
Team captains, join your teams.
Thank you.
It's a nightmare and a dream all wrapped up into one.
In my kitchen, they're all gonna be dancing around to classical music, and Leslie's team is gonna be like hard-core rock and roll, people fighting.
It's gonna be incredible.
- All right, you guys ready? - Yes, chef.
Your time starts Now.
- LetÂ´s go! - Go, go! Both teams will have just two hours to devise and prepare their dishes before serving their appetizers to the bride, groom, and their 120 guests.
I'm a little bit nervous 'cause this is the kind of challenge we normally have further down the line when they're a little bit more confident, but more importantly, a little bit more experienced, because this is a big one.
- The expectation is huge.
- Yeah.
With the clock ticking, each team must find a unique way to prepare the scallops and sea bass for today's wedding.
For the starter, I want to do three scallops.
But I want a bed of arugula with some papaya in there.
I want it to be with a pineapple, spicy coriander sauce.
This is gonna go so well because Francis already sees it on the plate.
He's like, "This is what I want," and we just have to bring it to life.
All right, let's get to work.
While Francis confidently commands the blue team I want you to keep an eye on that fish.
the red team's captain Leslie has an altogether different approach to leadership.
Okay, so scallops, I was thinking something on the top, maybe - Mango salsa.
- I like that.
So what are we serving with the sea bass? - Could you do purple potato mash? - Yeah, I can.
- Okay.
My strategy is, I don't want to take control of the situation.
I want to hear everybody's opinion, and I want to just try and figure out what direction we want to go in.
Everybody, let's get to work, we got to figure out what's what.
As the red team begins prep under Leslie's unconventional leadership the finishing touches are being completed in the reception area Morning.
and Gordon gives his best wishes to the bride before her big day.
You and Mike are huge foodies, right? You know, we are the ones who feed everybody.
We're the ones who have these giant parties.
Everyone comes to us for food, so expectations are going to be huge.
- Have a great day.
- Thanks.
Thank you.
Good to see you.
Back in the kitchen, the blue team is united and focused.
Captain of the blue team.
Here you go.
How you feeling? - Fantastic, everything - You in control? - Absolutely.
- Good.
Run me through the menu, please.
We're doing arugula, papaya, jicama salad.
I love the idea.
How are you cooking the scallops? Scallops are being pan fried over there.
Victoria's got control of that.
- Entree, sea bass? - We're doing a beurre blanc but with lemongrass and purple cauliflower puree.
Young man, you sound on it.
- Keep it up.
- Thank you, chef.
While the blue team has impressed chef Ramsay with their teamwork and menu, the red team is having difficulty getting on the same page.
Right, captain, where are you? - Yes, sir.
- Explain the menu.
We're doing scallops on a pea puree - Avocado.
- With an avo Pea and avocado puree, and we're gonna do a little fennel on the side.
- On top.
- On top.
- On top.
- And then Sounds like Stop.
Francis B, do you know the menu more than the captain? Yes, he knows the menu more than I do.
- Hold on a minute.
Who's the captain? - I'm the captain.
Okay, entree.
Talk about the entree.
- Sea bass.
- Uh, the sea bass, we're going to We got, uh - Do the red team know what they're doing? - No They don't.
We're We're still trying to get our groove.
I mean, seriously? Can you have a meeting and get your [bleep] together now? Okay.
- This is embarrassing! - Talk to me.
Everybody's walking away.
Talk to me.
Leslie's panicking.
He's all over the place.
He's going, "Talk to me! Talk to me!" Talk to me.
Anybody need anything? We're finished with the ginger? No more ginger? What? Talk to me.
You're supposed to be telling us what to do.
Why do we got to talk to you? - Talk to me.
- I don't know what the [bleep] is happening right now.
While captain Leslie struggles to keep the red team afloat, things are picture perfect on the beach for Mike and Joplin's wedding day.
I honor you as my husband forevermore.
Would you like to kiss your bride? - Yes.
- Please do.
As the newlyweds make their way to the reception Leslie's leadership style is making waves amongst the red team.
- Put the strainer in the pot.
- Okay.
No, put the strainer in that pot.
Leslie, you need to stop yelling, okay? You're not helping our team at all right now.
You're wasting a lot of time.
No, I'm [bleep] not.
Nobody seems to be listening.
I'm trying my best.
I've never done this before.
I've never led people who didn't want to be led.
Let's go! We are getting lost.
Leslie! Get it together, let's go! In this team challenge, our home cooks must prepare a scallop appetizer and sea bass entree for 120 wedding guests.
As newlyweds Joplin and Mike celebrate the happiest day of their lives back in the kitchen, Leslie's lack of leadership has left the red team in no mood to party.
This is out of freaking control, man.
Leslie is absolutely breaking down as a human being.
He is unfit for the job, and we've really got to do something extreme to turn this around.
Come here.
Come here.
This is your ship now, okay? - All right, guys, guys - Hustle! I need everybody here right now! Guys, come over.
The best idea is, appoint Francis B, the guy who had a successful team last time around.
I'm taking over.
You guys, if you have any questions, ask me.
All of a sudden, they all decided that I am out of control and I don't know what I'm doing.
Francis, you think you can do a better job, fine.
I don't care what it takes.
If it means me getting a demotion and not being team captain anymore, but at the end of the day, we win this, that's all I'm concerned about.
This is how we're doing it.
Main dish, we scrap the potatoes all in all.
We got the sea bass, right? We're gonna have to figure out how to control that flattop.
I am competitive.
I was playing golf on a professional level for a little bit, and having to compete with all these other people that have years and years of practice, same thing in the kitchen.
I'm gonna be cool and calm.
I got this.
We got to get working on the vinaigrette too.
As soon as Francis B takes over as team captain, things started moving in the right direction.
As the red team makes up for lost time, out in the reception area, the bride and groom are taking their seats, and the 120 guests are excitedly waiting for the start of service.
Red team, blue team, five minutes left.
Remember, a fine dining experience on the beach.
I need perfect scallops.
We'll take the best of the whole bunch.
I need two appetizer dishes right here.
You have less than a minute.
Two app dishes, now.
Francis, let's do it! I got it.
Yo, I'm waiting for the scallops.
- Let me get scallops up here.
- Scallops! Let's go! Leslie, Leslie, that's okay.
We don't need more screaming.
All right, bride and groom, scallops.
Coming up, coming up.
Yeah.
Perfect.
While Francis finally has the red team on track, the blue team is still working to complete their scallop appetizer for the bride and groom.
All right, let's get the bride's going.
So we're plating, and it's happy chaos, because the plates look so good, but it's very difficult.
But they all have to look perfect, 'cause this is a wedding challenge.
It has to be memorable.
- Go, bride and groom.
- You good with these? You approve? Absolutely.
As Joe makes his way to the reception with appetizers for the bride and groom, both teams continue to plate their scallop dishes for all the guests.
The winner of today's challenge will be decided by the judges, who will be considering each team's performance in the kitchen, along with the feedback of the newlyweds and their guests.
So we have, from the blue team and the red team.
The two teams will be cooking for you.
We have seared scallops of the blue team, and these are the seared scallops of the red team.
The blue team is serving seared scallops with an arugula salad, watermelon radishes, and a pineapple sauce.
The red team is serving seared scallops with a pea and avocado puree and a mango salsa.
So have a taste, and you'll tell me - what you think about it.
- Okay, great.
The blue dish is excellent.
There's a lot of flavor going on there.
You think the blue team's the winner? - Yeah, I mean, this is - You don't agree? - Really? - Oh, my god.
I think the red's avocado actually works.
- Really? - It's the first domestic battle.
With the bride and groom sharing a difference of opinion on the appetizers, the competition is wide open, and replacement captain Francis has the red team firing on all cylinders.
Guys, these are looking good, all right? Despite how crazy it is back in the kitchen, we might actually be able to pull this off, because our dishes are looking great, and they're actually getting out in time.
Last table, red team.
Let's go.
All right, let's take it up.
As the red team finishes the appetizer service on a high note, the blue team is having trouble completing their orders.
Just touch on top of there, please.
Come on, quickly.
No one's gonna bite you.
Blue team! The scallops are stone-cold! Nine scallops, I need nine fresh scallops, please.
I've got 11 fixing to come till you give me a couple minutes.
- Let's go, let's go, let's go.
- The dish is too complicated.
The scallop dish, as we're putting it together, there's so many elements, it's very hard to get ten plates to leave at once.
Service.
Finally, the blue team gets their last table of appetizers out to the dining room, where the wedding guests are now giving Joe a big thumbs-up for both teams' dishes.
Did anyone enjoy the red team's scallops? Hands in the air.
Full house.
You guys loved it.
Awesome, thank you.
I really liked the blue team's scallops.
They're very soft, very juicy, very moist.
As the appetizer portion of service comes to an end, the competition is too close to call.
Meanwhile, the red team has hit a problem while doing a practice plating for their sea bass entree.
We're just trying to figure out how exactly we're gonna make this look.
But there was another garnish on there.
It was the potatoes, and we decided that wasn't a good idea.
Did we not diverse and come up with another starch? - We didn't, we - We can't just put broccolini and the bass on there.
I'm not in charge anymore, so I don't know what's going on.
- Six minutes to go.
- What can we do in that time? Something that you can do quickly.
Hurry up! Let's go! Red team, get it together! Let's go! With entree service set to begin, the red team must quickly devise a side component for their sea bass.
So let's do tomatoes, let's get some cucumbers going, and we can mix iup with the fennel, and that'll be fine.
- Can we hurry up, please? - Yes, okay, guys, let's do this.
With their dish finally set, the red team is serving a seared s bass with spicy broccolini and an heirloom tomato and cucumber salad, While the blue team is serving a seared sea bass with purple cauliflower puree, white asparagus, and a lemongrass beurre blanc sauce.
Four minutes to go, red team.
As the red team rushes to finish the new side for their entree, the blue team has regained their composure.
- Bride and groom, fish.
- As we're placing the sea bass, again, it's complicated.
They take time to be put together, but they look bloody good.
Ready to serve the bride and groom.
With the blue team in complete control of their entree service, the red team is still scrambling to plate their sea bass for the newlyweds.
Bride and groom first, please.
Jordan, why you zoning out? What's wrong? Jordan, what are you doing? Everybody was busy working, and Jordan was just walking around.
Jordan, get out of the [bleep] way.
You're like dog [bleep] in the middle of the road.
Get out of the way.
Come on, get involved.
Guys, let's go.
This is gonna be ice cold.
Ready? Let's go.
The red team finally completes their first round of entrees, and Joe will now serve the sea bass from both teams to the bride and groom.
Okay, so we have the sea bass of the red team, and we have the sea bass of the blue team.
So have a taste, and tell me what you think about it.
So do you prefer the sea bass of the blue team or the sea bass of the red team? For me, definitely the sea bass of the blue team.
When you get a bite of everything, the beurre blanc with the potato, it's a perfect bite.
And for you, mike? We're divided again.
Red team for me.
It tastes great.
It's got a nice sear on it.
Red sea bass is way better.
A house divided against itself cannot stand.
- I do love you.
- I love you too.
Back in the kitchen, the red team is finishing up their final table of entrees, but Christian is concerned by teammate Tyler's appetite.
- Come on, guys, keep it going.
Keep it going, let's go.
- Tyler! Stop eating! No more eating! - I'm tasting.
- I don't want to see nobody else eat! - Tyler.
- Yes, chef.
- We'll eat after we serve the [bleep] wedding! Let's go! We're here to work, not eat! I need beautifully cooked fish.
I have eight coming up.
One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten.
- So we're short two portions.
- We don't have any more fish.
- Red team, what's wrong? - We were short fish.
What do you mean, we're short fish? How many portions are we short? - Two portions, we're short.
- Two portions.
Only thing that can go through my mind, Tyler.
Like, where is my fish? I saw you eating it.
It was in his damn stomach.
So we're gonna have to send out two guests with half portions of the fish, because the big portions there, you're gonna have to cut in half.
I'm not serving them nothing, guys, yeah? We're doomed.
We're going down.
And it was like the Titanic.
We were sinking.
Service, please.
Last table.
With the red team limping over the finish line, the blue team confidently sends out their final orders of sea bass.
- Okay, good.
- Service, please.
- Service, please.
- Thank you.
All right, guys.
Good job, y'all! - Yeah, good job, we're done.
- Way to go, guys.
We knocked it out of the park.
There's no way we're losing this thing.
- Good job.
- Good job, Francis.
Complicated but it was good.
Despite the strong performance by the blue team, over in the reception area, the reviews of the sea bass are mixed.
I'm eating the blue team's sea bass.
It looked really great, but I just wish it had a little bit more of a kick in the flavor department.
So you got to taste the sea bass of the red team as an entree.
How was it? You know, I think everybody's probably pretty impressed - by this dish, absolutely.
- By the red team? All right.
As Mike and Joplin's wedding celebration continues, the judges debate the day's performance by both teams.
There was bumps in both kitchens.
But I have to say, for such an important day and a big challenge, I was really proud of both of our teams today.
Yeah.
Having settled on a winner, the judges ask the bride to deliver the verdict by tossing the winning team her bouquet.
Joplin, please take the floor.
Thank you.
We put our heart and soul into this challenge, and I feel great about what we've put up.
Even though it was this catastrophic [bleep] from the get-go, all of that aside, our components came together, and we've got a shot.
Now, the winning team was Three Two One.
Blue team! I'm in shock.
I can't believe it.
This win takes me to the next level.
Now everyone looks at me a serious contender.
Well done, blue team.
Thank you, thank you.
Unfortunately, red team, there are two kitchens standing behind you that need clearing up.
Go back and tidy up the mess you left on the beach.
Thank you.
Congratulations, blue team.
The feeling of losing sucked.
At least one person is going home, and so I need to make sure that that person is not me.
Tensions are high right now on the red team, because now we got to go through a pressure test, and I did feel some responsibility for a certain amount of what happened here.
For starters, I'm sorry I didn't turn out to be what you guys wanted.
I'm not perfect, okay? This is a learning curve for me.
You have no communication, like, skills at all and Can I say something, or are you just gonna jump in every time because you're an 18-year-old, and that's what you do? Hey, you know what? You know what, you can disrespect me all you want, okay, because that's what teenagers do.
- Okay, so grow up and - You know what, I respect Grow some balls.
Leslie, you're 56.
She's 18.
Don't compare with her.
From the moment I picked her, she gave me this look of, "I don't want to be on your team.
" Know why? It's because you mispronounced my name, - and from the start - Well, I'm sorry, I apologize.
- You know what? - No, that's the thing I don't know how else to put "sorry.
" - S-o-r-r-y.
- All right, shut it down.
- That's sorry.
You're not sorry at all! You're being really condescending right now, - and it's not helping.
- Of course, I'm condescending, because I'm tired of getting beat up by everybody here.
I'm not gonna stand here and be abused, okay? Let's take a walk.
Let's take a walk.
- Enough is enough.
- Let's take a walk.
She had no respect for me from day one, and if you want respect, you have to earn it, and if I give it to you, I damn better get it back.
That's how the real world works.
"please," "may I," "thank you.
" That's how I was brought up, not crying and running and [bleep].
Let him walk.
Let him walk.
It's my second pressure test, and I haven't won a team challenge, and these are the consequences.
They're called "pressure tests" for a reason.
It makes you feel uncomfortable, it's the unknown, and the worst thing about a pressure test is, in the end, someone's going home, and I hope it's not me.
Yesterday, we challenged you home cooks to serve 120 guests at a beautiful beachfront wedding.
Blue team, you guys were phenomenal, and that's why you're up there on the balcony, safe from elimination.
Red team, after tasting everything and talking to the bride and groom and their guests at the wedding, we decided that your performance was infinitely inferior to the blue team.
That means you will be facing the dreaded pressure test.
Yeah, I mean, let's start off with the captain.
In your mind, where did it go wrong? Pretty much, me becoming captain.
I learned a very valuable lesson.
- It's a big price to pay - Yes, it is a big price.
For your lesson, because one of the nine members on your team-- at least one will be going home.
I'm not perfect.
I don't know what else you want from me.
Right.
There are nine cooks standing in front of us, but not all of you are going to have to cook tonight.
Only three of you are.
What? What? Leslie, you were the team captain.
Captains, leaders have to make big and very serious decisions.
Which three members of your team do you think should compete in tonight's pressure test? They threw me under the bus, so I figure, now it's my turn to return the favor.
I think I'm gonna start off with Christian.
He seems to know everything and do everything, so I'd like to see him perform.
Second choice, please.
Uh, Daniel, because I was on his team, and I killed myself for him, no matter what.
Wow.
And he did nothing for me except complain about me.
And "Iran.
" - Oh, wow! - Seriously? - Her name's "Ahran.
" - Wow.
- Why Ahran? She and I don't seem to see eye-to-eye, and I have the choice, and I can.
Coward.
Like, honestly, what the hell, dude? If he was a real man, he would have chosen himself to cook in the pressure test.
Interesting choices.
Fortunately for them, it's not your decision.
We will be deciding which three of you will face the pressure test.
Oh, jeez, I mean, this can't get any worse.
First, they nail me to a cross on a beach.
Now they're gonna burn me at a stake.
Each one of us will choose one home cook who we think did the worst job in the wedding challenge.
- Gordon? - Easy, Leslie.
You led your team to disaster, completely fragmented from the get-go.
You will face tonight's dreaded pressure test.
- Good.
- Bye.
Graham.
This person didn't contribute anything to their team.
They looked lost and might as well have not been on the team at all, and that person is Jordan.
(Gordon) Joe.
My third pick is difficult.
It is someone who stepped up on the back of Leslie's poor leadership but ultimately failed.
Francis Biondi.
I had appointed Francis B as the team captain, and to see him have to take the fall, I feel horrible.
The rest of you, you should all be pretty ashamed of your performance, but you're safe for now.
Please head up to the balcony.
Go.
So for this pressure test, you're gonna have to work with an ingredient that practically defines this country.
What's in here is the quintessential American protein.
Steak.
Medium rare, or ruby red in the middle, slowly turning into brick red, and then the sear on the outside.
Steak frites.
This dish may have started as a European bistro standard, but trust me, America owns it now.
Now, you can just tell how good it is just with the naked eye.
The knife slides through it like butter, and look, a perfect medium rare.
- So hungry.
- That's beautiful.
We want a steak that's perfectly seasoned, perfectly seared, and perfectly medium rare, And don't overlook those fries.
I see steak and frites, and I'm just like, "All right, you either cook a perfect steak, or you're going home.
" That's about as straightforward as you can get.
It's time to go to your stations.
You have just 30 minutes to make us an amazing plate of steak frites.
In front of you, you all have the exact same ingredients: one stunning New York strip, butter, garlic, thyme, russet potato and some fresh parsley.
At the end of this pressure test, at least one of you three will be going home.
- Got it? - Yes, chef.
Your 30 minutes starts Now.
I feel like I got run over by a truck, but I wasn't expecting anything less.
It's all part of MasterChef kitchen.
You want to win it, you got to be in it.
I'm in it.
When they say, "pressure test," they're not kidding.
There's only three people down here, so the chances of leaving are great.
I don't really cook steak often, but when I do, it's usually a nice, big hunk of meat like this.
I think I'm the best cook out of the three here.
So what are we looking for in steak frites? First thing I'm looking for is the sear, that intense char.
How do you get the crunch without overcooking the inside? You have to be precise in turning it.
- You gotta cook it on the back as well.
- Render the fat off it.
Really important.
Shoestring potatoes can be tricky, right? - How do you cut 'em? - They have to be cut evenly.
One thick end, one thin end, you got soggy fries.
A lot of times, they'll stick it in, they won't fry evenly Yeah, sure.
So you got to make sure each one's broken apart.
The secret here tonight is having the confidence to cook the fries literally with 90 seconds to go, - so they stay crisp.
- Stay crisp? - What is he doing? - Doing a test batch.
Leslie, so now, you're out of the team, you're working on your own.
I don't mind being on my own.
Yeah, I'm a big boy.
That looks delicious.
You gonna baste it with that? Oh, yes.
Some butter and some herbs and some garlic.
Wow, that's a very sophisticated technique you're doing right now.
So, Leslie, this'll infuse, but watch some of that garlic - as it starts getting brown in the high heat - Yes, it'll get bitter.
- Bitter and burn everything.
- Yes.
Who's most likely to leave tonight? Probably Jordan, because I think he hasn't cooked as many steaks as I have.
Right, Jordan, how you feeling? Feeling very good.
I may not have made as many steaks as Leslie, but I make them a lot better.
Okay, don't get defensive.
Get even.
- What are you doing? - I'm basting it.
It's gonna take a little bit of time, and I want to have ample time to rest and have those juices really develop.
Okay, so it doesn't sound that hot from here.
Is the sizzling sufficient? It's on high, yeah.
I got the heat all the way up.
You've got to get that nice, hot sear.
- Yes, chef.
- Are you staying in the competition tonight? - Yes, chef! - Good luck.
- Thank you.
Francis.
- How you doing, chef? - That smells good.
It's looking good.
Don't overcook that.
Remember, once you put it on that rack, it will continue to cook.
Just feel it, touch it.
Remember, mid-rare, you want it to feel just like this, right? And at the end of the day, better a little under than over.
How about the fries? I'm definitely not gonna overlook these fries.
Try to get a good color and toss 'em in some salts and some parsley.
I want to make 'em perfect fries for you guys.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.
Just under ten minutes remaining.
Oh, yeah, baby.
Leslie's steak looks amazing.
He's basting it in butter now.
I think he's got the right cook on it.
He might be in good shape.
I love that herb butter.
How's Jordan doing? Jordan's slightly flustered.
Pan wasn't hot.
Pan wasn't hot? That's, like, the biggest mistake you can make.
I'm nervous that Francis cooked that steak off so early.
So early, yeah.
It's gonna continue to cook.
And my big concern with Francis B is that his fries already cooked.
With just under ten minutes to go, they're gonna be stone-cold.
Francis, did you think about doing a compound butter - to put on top of it? - Never done it.
You have all those nice herbs.
Get your butter going, get it in the blast chiller.
Kind of, like, mix it? Yeah, you just You smash it in.
- Then you roll it in.
- Do not give your competition help.
I can't believe this.
There's a one-in-three chance of me going home, and I'm pissed.
Francis B is getting all this damn help, and I'm sitting here like a sitting duck.
Francis, put a glove on and use your hand.
Those people, they didn't like me from day one, because I'm the old guy, but if I go home over Francis B because of a compound butter, this'll be an atrocity.
In tonight's pressure test, Leslie, Jordan, and Francis must cook steak frites to a perfect medium-rare temperature or risk being sent home from the MasterChef kitchen.
Just under seven minutes to go.
Francis, just mix it up in your hand.
Perfect, put it in a bowl.
Put it in the freezer.
And while you're there, go get a plate.
I'm going to do my best to help Francis B because I don't like Leslie.
Nobody came into this with a preconceived notion that he was a [bleep].
He has proven that to us over time.
Dude is a [bleep].
I just can't stand the guy.
Leslie has not been the popular kid, but me and him are really close.
- Go, Leslie! - Willie, I love you, man.
- Love you too.
You're the best.
Team Leslie all day, America.
Feel good.
My steak, I think, came out really nice.
I just got to make sure these fries are perfect, which I think they're there.
Feeling good.
I'm feeling good.
It definitely is the most important steak I've ever made in my life.
Last two minutes.
For at least one of you, this is the last time you will be cooking in the MasterChef kitchen.
I'm worried about Jordan.
I mean, it looks like it didn't render the fat.
(Joe) He's gonna present the steak With a big, yellow piece of grisly fat on it.
That's a ticket out of here.
Come on, guys, finishing touches, come on.
- Francis B is torching his steak.
- What? - I've never seen that.
- Never, ever.
Sorry, I've never seen that.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
Hands in the air.
Well done.
All three of you, please bring your dishes down to the front.
Let's go.
I look down at my plate, and I'm happy with it.
I got a nice sear on the steak.
Looking around, I definitely think that if anyone's gonna go home, it's Leslie, because his just looks boring and underwhelming.
Okay.
What's the secret behind the steak frite? A lot of love and the secret butter sauce on top.
Why are there raw herbs on the plate? Just for design.
No reason.
So great color on the steak.
- Medium rare, right? - Medium rare.
- Do you want to look away? - No.
Why should I? You confident? Oh, yeah.
Nailed.
You tell me.
They could be a little crispier.
Come on.
They're soft and limp.
You know that.
- So the steak is done beautifully.
- Okay.
But unfortunately, your fries are dreadful.
Thank you.
Thank you.
- How were the frites? - Dreadful.
- Really? How good is the steak, though? Is it good enough? Perfect? Yeah, it's It is absolutely on the money.
Nice.
Good.
How are you, chef? - How are you? - Good.
- I think the plating on this is beautiful.
- Thank you.
The steak looks like it's got a nice sear, however, the fat layer that's over here on the side, it doesn't like you really rendered it.
And now, when I carve this, what do you think it's gonna look like? I'm confident it's a medium rare.
So I think that's a little more medium.
Even cookery on each side, which is super important, but it did go, you know, a couple minutes longer - Just a hair too long, yeah.
- Exactly.
Still got some juiciness to it.
It's got good flavor, but it's definitely not medium rare.
Doesn't have that melt-in-your-mouth quality to it.
And now, your frites, they can use a little more color.
- Feel that, you know, you don't - Yeah, those are limp.
- Those are limp.
- You don't want - flaccid potato action going on.
- Absolutely.
- Seasoned beautifully, though.
- Thank you.
- Thank you.
- Thank you very much.
Yeah, the steak, not rendered, overcooked.
- Overcooked? - Medium, a little over medium.
My only hope now is that Francis did something overdone or underdone in his steak for me to stay in this competition.
What do you think, Francis? - I'm feeling good.
- Is that a compound butter? - What's the butter? - It is a compound butter.
You're the only one who did that.
What were you doing with the torch there? I was just blasting the compound butter so that it would melt over the steak.
- So we want medium rare.
- Yes, we do.
We want a nice crust, which you seem to have.
On the inside, though, the heart of the steak has to be red.
It's a brick red, to pink - Okay.
- To the crust on the outside.
I can't even watch Joe cut into my steak right now, I'm so nervous.
This has to be perfect.
Otherwise, I'm going home.
What do we got? So we want medium rare.
The heart of the steak has to be red, it's a brick red, to pink - Okay.
- To the crust on the outside.
What do we got? That's medium.
Yeah, because to be a perfect medium rare, you would need to have a little bit of red on the inside.
Let's have a taste.
The sear is nice.
What did you flavor it with? Thyme, rosemary, butter, garlic.
Just basted it.
Good flavor.
You can taste all the herbs.
Although it's not medium rare, like Jordan's.
You're right about the same temperature, you two.
Now, since we are neck-and-neck, the fries are gonna mean a lot here.
What'd you put, some herbs in your fries? I did, I did, I put thyme and toasted rosemary, yeah.
They're very crispy.
They're good.
Yeah.
I like the herbs.
Some of these bigger pieces are a little soggy.
Why didn't you pull this out? I did not see that.
Too bad.
Thank you.
So it's the same.
It's medium.
It's not medium rare.
The most important thing is the cook, - the cook on the steaks.
- Steaks.
Followed by the flavor.
So really, if Leslie did a true medium rare, then he's on the top of the heap.
Then you gottawe gotta decide between the other two.
Between the other two.
Francis and I are neck-and-neck, and I want this so bad that I am just hoping that they like mine better.
Leslie, Jordan, Francis, we asked each of you to create a perfect steak frite.
One of you did nail that steak perfectly.
Congratulations, Leslie.
Oh, god.
I don't know if it's your life experience or having eaten many more steaks than these other two, but you nailed medium rare, the char, everything.
Good job.
Please, go join your best friends up there to the balcony.
I deserve to be up on that balcony.
I mean, that steak looked perfect.
As for Jordan and Francis B, good luck.
Francis, Jordan, neither of you nailed that steak.
You both overcooked the steak.
However, there was one that actually tasted better.
Better seasoning, better fries, almost in a way that it was cooking with confidence.
The person staying in MasterChef is Francis B.
Say good-bye to Jordan and head up to the gallery.
Jordan, young man, let me tell you something.
You may not have progressed to the top 15, top 10.
However, you are a talented young man, 19 years of age.
- You got your whole life in front of you.
- Thank you.
I seriously hope you get yourself in the business as soon as possible.
Keep your head up high.
I am so happy to be here, and going back home, I can hold my head up high.
- Well done.
- Thank you.
Come and say good-bye.
Good job, Jordan.
- Good luck.
- Thank you so much.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Way to go, Jordan.
This competition has been the greatest experience of my life.
MasterChef has taught me so much about the fundamentals of cooking, and it is really laying the foundation for me just to grow even more.
Blue! Blue! Blue! You go in with such high hopes and such expectations of yourself.
It's hard when it all it's all over.
Next time on MasterChef, the kitchen is graced by two returning champions.
Last year's winner, Luca.
And our first-ever MasterChef Junior winner, Alexander.
It was like royalty walked in.
But it is one devastating mistake that takes center stage.
For the very first time someone brought us a dish that they did not cook.
A wedding to remember, as America's best home cooks catered the reception.
But Leslie's poor captaincy I don't know what's going on here.
Get your [bleep] together now! Led to a blue team victory.
I said I'm sorry.
You're not sorry at all! And in the pressure test, it was a tearful Jordan who said good-bye.
Tonight The kitchen is graced by two returning champions.
Last year's winner, Luca Aah! And our first-ever MasterChef Junior winner, Alexander.
It was like royalty walked in.
But it's one catastrophic mistake that takes center stage.
For the very first time, someone has brought us a dish that they did not cook.
Come on down.
Make your way to your station.
The top 30, top 20, and now the top 16 It's an incredible feeling.
I'm a country boy from Wilmington, Ohio.
So, to walk away with the title MasterChef, for me, that's that's the ultimate.
Let's go.
I'm really hoping that I win this mystery box, because winning two in a row would be an incredible achievement, and it would really prove to my competitors that I am one of the front-runners.
Welcome back, everyone.
Seems like we've put you through a lot already, doesn't it? Yes.
But trust me, we are just getting started.
Now it's time for another mystery box challenge.
As with every mystery box challenge, the home cooks must prepare, cook, and present one incredible dish using all or some of the ingredients inside the box.
Focus.
It's time to find out what's under your mystery box.
I want something unique that will throw somebody else's game off under the box.
I want the rabbit or a squirrel or something that somebody somebody'd look at and go, "Whoa.
" I really want bone marrow under that box.
I could really get down and dirty with some bone marrow.
On the count of three, lift your boxes.
One Two Three.
Lift.
Oh.
Oh, my god.
That's right, tin cans.
People across America cook with cans like this every day.
Ingredients we all have in our pantries Every house in America has tin cans Oh, my.
Except in most houses, the cans have labels.
They don't need labels, because where I'm from, everything we do is in a can.
I'm feeling real confident in what I'm gonna produce.
In my house, we never really ate canned food.
We always use, like, fresh ingredients.
So, at this point, I'm kind of worried.
This is like a doomsday prepper's dream come true.
You all have Identical ingredients.
You can open up as many cans as you like, Use as many or as few as you like.
You'll also each have a staple pantry box, which includes milk, eggs, and flour to help make your dishes shine.
You'll each have to turn whatever's in those cans into one stunning dish.
Win this challenge, and you can come into the pantry, where you'll get a huge advantage An advantage that can send your toughest competitor back home.
Right, is everyone ready? Yes, chef.
Your 60 minutes Starts Now.
Don't know what that is.
Ugh.
What? Nice.
Ugh.
Ah, this is awesome.
So 52 cans of deliciousness.
Let's have a look at the basic ones.
Chickpeas, baby corn, canned olives, beetroot.
- Fruit salad.
- Fruit salad.
- Peaches.
- Asparagus.
I mean, this is a tough challenge, this one, guys, tonight.
I mean, you know, I don't envy their task.
How many ingredients do you open? Is it 3 cans? Is it 6? Is it 10? Is it 20? The key tonight is to use the staple pantry to get you into some quality handmade food, then just use the cans for that extra touch.
- Olives.
- Peaches.
That's a plus.
So, Joe, what would you do? I would definitely take that spinach, wash it out good, lots of garlic - to take the canned flavor away.
- Yeah.
- Do maybe, like, an orecchiette with garlic and spinach.
- Nice.
I'm gonna do eggs Benedict.
I didn't open all my cans because a couple of cans stood out already.
I have a creamy beet and potato soup that's gonna have a crispy potted meat topping.
It's gonna be like a borscht.
I think this is one that I can actually win, like, this is one where having a childhood filled with canned foods is actually an advantage.
I've been waiting for that to be an advantage in this competition, and now it is.
I think it is a huge waste of time opening up all these cans, 'cause there's so many.
So I'm using the staple box and the canned fruit to make a cake.
I am legitimately stumped right now.
I am about to start crying.
Francis L.
Sir, yes, chef.
- How are you doing? - Experimenting.
- Playing.
- Experimenting.
No, you? Experimenting? Really? Come on.
Right, what's the dish? I'm doing a thai-inspired seafood soup.
So I took a lot of the juices from the cans of fish - and I made a fish stock and soup.
- Wow.
Juices.
Now, everyone's discarding the juices, so you're going You're you're Juices are my best friend.
I made and amazing seafood stock here, I believe.
Good luck.
- Hello, Ahran.
- Hi.
What do you know about cooking with canned food? You making a little fruit salad? No, I'm making a sponge roll cake.
Is your sponge cake already baking? Yeah, it's in the oven right now.
I'm filling it with some fruit and whipped cream.
- There you go.
- Oh, so you're going pastry.
Yeah, I'm gonna make the fruit to not taste as artificial.
- Yeah, you got to rinse 'em really good.
- Yeah.
Victoria, how are you feeling? - Oh, I'm feeling all right.
- Where are we going? It will be a potted meat fritter with a pickled salad.
Top 16 great news for making this far, but we haven't actually seen you shine yet.
You know, I haven't shown up like I wanted to show up, and I'm hoping that with this challenge, I can do that.
Even though it's canned food, I want to put my best out there, - and I want it to be phenomenal.
- Yep.
I want to be someone that people are looking out for.
Good luck.
I think I'm just gonna make a soup.
Ten minutes left.
- Tough, tough mystery box, this one.
- Very hard.
So I see Elizabeth's using the beets.
- Yeah.
- What is she making? A traditional Russian borscht.
Love the flavor.
- Borscht is smart.
- Yeah, very smart.
Francis Legge he's taken all the juices from the cans in an asian-inspired sort of coconut-broth soup.
Ahran made a sponge.
Oh, really? And it's already in the oven baking, and then she's got the fruit compote cooking down.
Very smart.
Willie what's he making? So he's doing the processed ham with a fried egg.
Almost like a sort of eggs Benedict.
- Boring.
- Just uninspiring.
This kind of a mystery box really discerns which cooks are able to think on their feet, have good intuition, and are really intelligent.
Let's go.
Last minute remaining.
For one of you, a huge advantage is at stake here.
They may be cans, but you can make a delicious meal.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
Stop! Hands in the air.
They may be cans, but you can make a delicious meal.
Five, four, three, two, one.
Stop! Hands in the air! Well done.
Throughout the mystery box challenge, the judges taste elements of all the home cooks' dishes as they come together.
They now take one final look to choose the top three standouts, and the winner of this challenge will receive a major advantage in the next round.
I have a feeling that this dish might finally put me on the map.
I'm just crossing my fingers, and I'm like, "This is the dish that's gonna get me there," 'cause I want to be in the top three.
I look down at my dish, and it's gorgeous.
That soup tastes bloody amazing.
This is gonna be my night, people.
All right, well done.
Now, on to three seriously good-looking dishes that we want to take an even closer look at Three dishes that stood out.
The first dish we want to take a closer look It was elevated.
It was hard to believe that the actual ingredients originated coming out of a can.
This home cook is about to have their first time in the top three.
Please step forward Elizabeth.
Oh, my god, like I finally feel like I'm a standout competitor.
Wow.
Describe the dish, please.
It's a beet and potato cream-based soup with a can of condensed milk and coconut milk, and then I made a crispy black-eyed pea canned ham and chickpea topping.
So you wanted that sort of creaminess.
I did want the creaminess, yes.
That's why I used the condensed milk.
Yeah, it's got that intriguing taste.
Delicious tasting, doesn't really need that sweetness there.
But you've created that balance with the seasoning.
So I got the heat.
Is that chili? Uh, cayenne and some paprika.
Yeah, it looks great.
I'd be happy to see that in a restaurant tonight for dinner, And I'd struggle to understand that that came out of a tin.
- Great start.
Thank you.
- Thank you, chef.
It's great.
I love the heat that comes with it, but also the saltiness of the ham, which, you know, a lot of times when it's kind of canned and preserved like that can be too much, but here, used to great effect.
- Great job.
- Thank you.
I love the richness of it.
I love the fact that you added the croutons of processed meat and chickpeas.
I think it has a good depth of flavor.
Great job.
Good soup.
- Thank you.
- Thank you.
The second dish that we really want to examine further had a hearty component to it.
It was something that we were intrigued by.
First time for this home cook in the top three.
Please step forward Victoria.
Boom! I'm in the top three! It happened! Tell us exactly what it is.
It's a potted meat fritter with a spicy, smoky ketchup, and a sauteed artichoke and beet salad with an herb vinaigrette.
So how many canned components are on the dish? All in all, I would say that there's maybe eight cans in here.
I think there are maybe five meats inside there.
Really good.
There's sweet, spicy, earthy, all those flavors going on.
Great use of the ingredients.
You know, the fritters are heavy, - Kind of dense, you know.
They could've been smaller.
- Yeah.
A little more finesse given to 'em, but as far as what you put on the plate, it's really great.
- Good job.
- Thank you, chef.
Thank you.
We love the idea of what you did with the fritters.
It's very sort of in, hip, sort of gastropub-y.
Here's the thing.
- It may not look the most attractive - Yeah.
But it delivers a punch of flavor.
Batter, delicious.
Canned artichokes, you know, not every chef can use them.
They've got a really nice char on them.
Beetroots work.
But the spicy ketchup is the one that lifts that whole dish together.
What's in there? I incorporated the adobo sauce with some diced tomatoes.
Uh, good job.
Thank you so much, chef.
Thank you.
The third and final dish we want to take a closer look at This home cook made a very, very smart use of the staple pantry box.
This home cook did not open all of their cans.
Please step forward, Ahran.
Tell me what the dish is.
So it's a sponge roll cake with canned fruit inside and a flavored whipped cream.
Certainly the smartest dish out of this mystery box is this one today.
If nothing else, just the ability to bake a sponge cake that's this soft and moist and light - is a skill set already.
- Thank you.
Then the intelligence of making a dessert No one else in this room did.
And then the courage to use one can of fruit cocktail.
Mm-hmm.
There's one cherry in it, though, right? The whole can had one cherry in it.
This is brilliant.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Any flavorings in the sponge? There's vanilla bean in there.
- But that's it.
- Delicious.
- Thank you.
- Nice.
Fragrant.
What would I change? - Little more color maybe.
- Mm-hmm.
Some lemon zest in the cream, cut down that richness.
You may be 18 years of age, but right now tonight, You have the biggest set of balls in this competition.
- Congratulations.
Good job.
- Thank you.
Elizabeth, Victoria, Ahran, all three of you, well done.
There can only be one winner, who'll join us in the pantry and receive that huge advantage.
I deserve to win this challenge because I really, I think, thought out of the box.
I made a cool, creative dish.
I want this advantage.
An advantage like never before.
It's crucial that I win this mystery box so that I can finally start to pull away from the rest of my competitors and make a name for myself in the kitchen.
The person who cooked the best dish tonight The fact that I took the risk to make this cake Nobody else did anything similar to mine.
This just shows my competitors that I am one of the front-runners here.
The person who'll get this huge, huge advantage in the upcoming elimination challenge That dish was cooked by The person who'll get this huge, huge advantage in the upcoming elimination challenge That dish was cooked by Congratulations Elizabeth.
Aah! I feel amazing.
I'm I'm like, I finally won! Are you ready to find out what your advantage is? - Yes.
- Let's go.
As the winner of the mystery box challenge, Elizabeth is now in control of the elimination test where at least one person will leave the competition.
Elizabeth, welcome to the MasterChef pantry.
Are you ready to find out the theme of today's elimination challenge? Born ready.
Well, we're not gonna tell you what it is.
We've invited a special guest who's gonna do that for us Someone who knows how to prevail under the pressure of this competition, Someone who has stood right there where you're standing.
Please welcome back last year's MasterChef winner, Luca.
Hey! Hello! Hi! Ciao, Elizabeth.
Luca, it's so nice to meet you.
- Welcome, Luca.
- Good to see you.
Now, last 12 months, what have you been doing? I have my own catering company.
Brilliant.
What's it called? Dinner with Luca.
Ah.
Kate and I are waiting for our little baby.
- Ah.
- Nice.
Fantastic.
Amazing.
Then I have my beautiful cookbook.
Titled My Italian Kitchen: Favorite family recipes, which is available now.
And my restaurant will be open by the end of the year in Brooklyn.
Fantastic.
And what's the name of that? We don't know yet.
Probably "Luca.
" Easy, right? So, Elizabeth, you know what's even cooler than one MasterChef winner? Two MasterChef winners.
Please welcome our youngest winner ever.
Oh, yes! First MasterChef junior Alexander.
Hi.
Hi.
Good to see you.
Welcome home.
Good to see you too.
- You good? - Thank you.
Yeah.
- Now, you've been busy.
- Yeah.
What have you been up to? I've been trying to do more cooking lessons for people who were inspired by the show and especially young kids who like to cook and want to learn more.
And I've kept on cooking.
I've learned so much.
Brilliant.
Wow.
Two amazing MasterChef champions together in one place.
Two amazing MasterChef dishes hidden under here.
Elizabeth, we told you that you would get some huge advantages in here.
For your first advantage, you do not have to cook either of these complex dishes tonight.
Your second advantage involves a choice regarding these two different dishes which we will show you in the MasterChef kitchen.
You're not going to choose between the two dishes.
You're gonna choose who is gonna have to cook which dish.
- I love that.
- Okay, Elizabeth, let's go and show everybody what they'll be cooking in tonight's elimination challenge.
Let's go.
Upstairs, please.
Because Elizabeth won the last mystery box challenge, she is safe from elimination, and she is through to the next stage of the competition.
The rest of you are far from safe.
At least one of you will be going home after this elimination challenge.
Elizabeth wasn't back there alone.
Please welcome two MasterChef champions Last year's winner, Luca And our first-ever MasterChef Junior winner, Alexander.
Excellent.
I cheered for Luca at home, and to see him there so successful and happy and proud I want to be that.
Alexander walks in, and that kid is, like, fierce.
I mean at 14 years old, I was like I was playing with my barbie dolls.
We asked Luca and Alexander to each make us one of their signature dishes Luca Can you please tell us what you created? This is my pancetta-wrapped veal filled with grana padano and sage.
served with radicchio, apples, and finished with a very classic white-wine sauce.
It looks very restaurant quality.
So I'm a little intimidated by it, because I'm not known for the prettiest of plates.
Alexander, why don't you tell us about your dish? This is my passion fruit panna cotta with a juniper berry raspberry coulis, candied hazelnuts, and a lavender crumble.
and this looks like something I would go get in a five-star restaurant.
Some of you will have to make Luca's savory dish, and some of you will have to cook Alexander's sweet dish.
And guess who gets to decide.
That's right.
Your fate is in the hands of Elizabeth.
My basic strategy is to assign the panna cotta to my competitors who don't have the finesse to pull it off and assign the veal to people that I think have weaker palates.
Elizabeth, which home cooks will have to re-create Alexander's phenomenal panna cotta? The first person that is gonna cook panna cotta is someone who's brimming with confidence, but I wonder if his bearish hands can create something delicate, and that would be Cutter.
Oh Death by desserts.
Here we go.
Give me some mojo, bro.
Give me some mojo.
Okay, the second home cook.
Christian.
- Third.
- Jaimee.
Wow.
Next pick.
Christine.
Next name, please.
- Ahran.
- Let's go.
Next.
Francis B.
- Next one.
- Victoria.
One more.
Last but not least, Tyler.
Elizabeth picked me to do the panna cotta.
I'm actually kind of excited.
Which means the rest of you out there will have the almost impossible mission of re-creating Luca's veal dish.
All of you, please, come up and have a taste of these amazing dishes.
Thank you.
There you go.
Alexander's panna cotta is so good.
Every bite I'm taking I am cataloguing the different flavor profiles, and I'm feeling really confident.
I'm tasting the dish, and what I'm noticing is that it's perfectly balanced.
I guess I'm starting to realize that I have a really good palate, and I'm going to kick this dish's ass.
Now that you've seen and tasted these two amazing dishes, It's time for you to replicate them.
You'll each have either Luca's savory dish or Alexander's sweet one, whichever one Elizabeth has selected for you.
Is everybody ready? Yes, chef.
Your time starts - Now.
- Off you go.
I'm just going by with what I tasted on Luca's dish.
What does radicchio look like? And I'm looking.
Like, radicchio? What is radicchio? Ah! Let's go, guys, come on! Good luck, guys.
Just chillin' with Luca no big deal.
Bloody hell! So Luca his signature dish, a pancetta-wrapped veal roulade.
How hard is that? The jeopardy is intense because you need that pancetta to be crisp.
You've got to cook the veal properly, and then they've got to let it rest So it cooks properly on the inside.
It's not just cooking you're butchering.
- Yeah.
- Pounding it thin.
So Alexander's dish, a panna cotta, cooked cream, but held together with gelatin.
And that is a very technical thing to be able to accomplish.
Just the way it sits on the plate, - It should be bulging at the side - Right, right.
So it's got to set, but it takes time to set.
Right.
You can't rush it.
Right, Courtney, why do you think Elizabeth picked veal for you? Well, probably because I've done some nice desserts and she hasn't had a chance to see me do anything savory.
I think she definitely sees me as a threat.
I've been in the top before, and she would probably like me to go home.
What are you doing? I had to pound out my veal.
I rolled it up.
- It's resting in the fridge.
- Good.
So you rolled it up tight with the saran wrap.
Rolled it up tight with saran wrap, yes.
And then you're gonna sear that off? Yes, I'm gonna sear it off, baste it Good luck.
Christian, why did Elizabeth give you the panna cotta? To be honest with you, I really don't know.
And, honestly, I really don't care.
I mean, to be honest with you, I'm down here trying to learn as I go and I'm not really that great with desserts, but I mean, this is why I'm here.
To be honest with you, maybe that's why she gave you panna cotta.
Probably so.
Right, Big Willie, how you doing? I'm doing pretty good, chef.
So you're cooking it now.
There's no pancetta around that? No, I'm going to sear this off and then I'm going to wrap it in the pancetta and put it in the oven.
So you're cooking the veal twice, so I suppose the danger tonight is you can actually make it dry.
Did Luca tell you to do that? No, Luca didn't tell me to do it.
I just I think that's what I need to do.
Yeah, but Luca didn't do that.
No, that's not what he did.
Someone's going home tonight.
Is it you? It's midway through the elimination test.
One half of the home cooks must replicate MasterChef junior winner Alexander's passion fruit panna cotta.
The other half must reproduce MasterChef champion Luca's pancetta-wrapped veal.
But not everyone is sticking to the menu.
Big Willie.
You're cooking the veal twice.
Did Luca tell you to do that? No, Luca didn't tell me to do it.
I think that's what I need to do.
Yeah, but Luca didn't do that.
Someone's going home tonight.
Is it you? I don't think it's gonna be me.
Wow.
Uh, Luca, Big Willie's searing off the veal first before he wraps it in pancetta he wants to add more flavor.
Uh, well, good for him.
He can invent a new dish.
I would not evolve it, because as you taught me, you need to learn how to walk before you start running.
Yeah.
So, Alexander, based on your observations, who is doing that panna cotta justice? I think that Jaimee is doing really well.
She's done the order of steps properly.
She's got her panna cottas in the blast chiller.
And I think that she's leaving herself enough time to plate, which is important.
And also Tyler looks pretty good.
I'm extremely nervous about the panna cotta not setting.
So I wanted to make sure that I got it in there and at least gave it enough time to set nicely.
Okay, uh, mr.
Panic.
All over the place.
- Looks like a bomb's gone off.
- Yeah, it is.
It's not "panna cotta," it's "panic Cutter.
" When was the last time you made a panna cotta? - Never.
- Never made a panna cotta? Never made a panna cotta.
- Have you eaten it? - No.
Never even eaten it.
Cutter, seriously? Try to work tidy.
Alexander's watching.
Come on.
Start pulling it together.
What the Somebody took a panna cotta off my tray.
I originally put in three panna cottas, and as I pull my tray out, there's only two here.
I don't know if somebody took it or on accident or is trying to sabotage me.
My first panna cotta, it just puddles.
Oh, guess I should try and bang out the other one.
Puddle.
Gee, I wish I had my third one.
Come on, let's go! Hurry up! Come on! Go, go, go.
Ahh.
Whoo! Come on, Tyler, put it on the plate.
Come on.
Let's go.
Finishing touches.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, fve, four, three, two, one, and stop! Hands in the air! Elizabeth, Luca, Alexander, please come downstairs.
Alexander, Luca, this way, please.
Elizabeth, straight back to your station, thank you.
Luca and Alexander, thank you for giving inspiration to our contestants this evening.
Good luck to everybody.
And listen to these three genius of the business, because every word they tell you is better than a book.
Good luck with your book.
Alexander, well done.
- Good luck.
-Good night, guys.
- Thank you.
- Thank you.
- Good night.
Thank you, guys.
Now it's time to start tasting those amazing dishes and find out who has cooked their last meal inside the MasterChef kitchen.
Okay, Courtney, let's go.
I am so proud of my dish.
It is like a photo replication of Luca's dish.
Sauce absolutely nailed.
Tell me what's inside the veal.
Inside the veal is grana padano cheese and sage leaves.
The dish looks beautiful.
Talk to me about the radicchio.
How did you cook it? I slowly cooked it with apple and a little bit of chicken stock and just let it cook itself down, get tender.
Yeah, you've definitely got mojo back.
Slight over-char on those sprouts.
However, the veal was nailed.
Rolled nice and tightly.
you do cook with confidence.
- Great job.
- Thank you, chef.
So why do you think Elizabeth gave you the veal? Because it was a very difficult plate to replicate, and she saw that I could do desserts, and I think she thought I might stumble on this.
Just by sight alone, it is right there with Luca's.
- It's delicious.
It's perfumed.
- Thank you.
It's fragrant.
It's cooked well.
Perfect.
Great job.
Thank you.
Is this something you've done before? I have never cooked veal before, ever.
That's amazing.
Thank you.
This dish is definitely a big statement.
I like the charred sprouts.
I think they're good that way.
- Thank you.
- The sauce is light.
There's enough sweetness, it's not over-acidic.
- Good job.
- Thank you.
Taking this dish that I don't even know what it's made of and nailing it is sending a strong message to all the other competitors, like, "You need to watch out.
" Next up, Big Willie.
Okay, it looks like Luca's dish, so I'm thinking, "Okay, good job.
" When you started cooking the veal dish, Did you not listen to Luca? I did listen.
When you pound any kind of protein out, it never takes lightly to being cooked twice.
So the big issue you had tonight was searing it without the pancetta and then wrapping it and cooking it again, - because as it rests, it'll just continue cooking.
- Yeah.
So therefore it's gonna be dry.
It's a shame Because the sauce is nice.
The radicchio is delicious.
You've nailed that part, but the hero The veal.
It's really dry.
So there's a reason why Luca stuffed it, rolled it, Wrapped it, and soaked it.
I'd be gutted Really sad for you to go home tonight.
But it looks like you've got one foot out the door.
Unless there's a bigger mistake out there tonight than yours, you'll go back to church on Sunday.
It's a shame - because the hero - The veal.
It's really dry.
I'd be really sad for you to go home tonight.
But it looks like you've got one foot out the door.
Unless there's a bigger mistake out there tonight than yours, you'll go back to church on Sunday.
Unfortunately, Big Willie's was kind of a letdown, which made me really sad.
I mean, he has to fail eventually if I'm gonna win, but he didn't have the best day.
Okay, next up, please, Christian.
Christian, how we doing? Not so good.
I'm very disappointed in myself.
The candied hazelnuts are not there.
My plating could've been better.
I feel that the hazelnut crumble could've been better.
I'm not I'm not happy.
I know I could've done better.
It's like a cheesecake.
Just way too much gelatin.
It's so firm.
This is something where Elizabeth put the target on your back.
She wanted you out of here.
She knows how strong you are.
She thought that this might trip you up, and I think that it did, 'cause this is easily the worst thing you've given us.
Cutter, come on up.
Why do you think that you were the first person given this dish, this panna cotta, by Elizabeth? 'Cause she knows desserts is my achilles' heel, and there's a lot of finesse to it.
And I have, like she said, big old bear hands.
Um, your panna cotta's actually really quite good.
It's funny.
You can tell just by the consistency of these which ones is right, which one's wrong.
And yours, Cutter, happens to be right.
Thank you.
Elizabeth I don't know what she was planning, but she targeted you, and I think it was a miss.
Gonna have to get him next time.
- Ooh, man.
- Good job.
Thank you.
Please come up, Jaimee.
I wish I still had my third ramekin.
I mean, my third one was my safety net.
but it went missing.
What do we have here? I need a spoon, actually.
I know.
It's mush.
I don't even know what to call it.
So what happened? This is the first time in six years that it has not set up on me.
If I would've had a third one, maybe It's like a really good pudding.
But the flavor's great, so I guess the one thing is seeing who else out here you know, performed at this level or lower.
I'm downright embarrassed right now.
This is a nightmare.
I am praying to the pastry gods above that someone messed up more than me.
Last up, Tyler, please.
Let's go.
Three blindfolds, please.
- Three blindfolds? - Blindfolds.
Is there anything you want to tell me about this dish? I thought everything was coming together, and then when it was time to plate, I had to, you know, jackknife powerbomb the ramekin on the plate just to get it out of there.
Right, Tyler for the very first time in MasterChef history, I am so sorry to tell you that someone has brought us a dish that they did not cook.
What do you mean, chef? Stay there.
Chef Ramsay walked to the back.
I was like, "Oh, [bleep].
What's about to happen?" I'm getting pretty nervous.
My heart's beating as fast as it can beat.
I still have no clue what's going on.
Oh, my gosh.
You got to be kidding me.
Tyler For the very first time, someone has brought us a dish that they did not cook.
What do you mean, chef? Stay there.
You got to be kidding me.
What do you see on that tray, young man? - My ramekins.
- Your ramekins.
Yes, chef.
I, uh My my I put my ramekins on the top shelf, and I don't know if they got switched I don't know, chef.
You didn't.
They were on the bottom shelf.
Bottom left-hand side.
You put four ramekins in the blast chiller.
I just pulled out the same four.
You served us Jaimee's panna cotta.
I-I had no clue.
I apologize.
For the record, I 100% believe you.
Yes, chef.
I think you panicked.
I think you ran in there with seconds to go and grabbed somebody else's dish.
This is a first in MasterChef history.
I'm afraid Joe, Graham, and myself need a few seconds to catch up.
Stay there.
Oh, dear.
I can't believe this is happening.
I mean, look If we wanted to taste his dish, it would be disrespectful to every other contestant who played by the rules.
And the rules of the competition say every challenge, you have to plate your food.
Now, I don't think it was meant purposely.
I think it was just a complete mistake.
- Rules are the rules.
- Rules are the rules.
In MasterChef, the biggest cooking competition anywhere in the world, we have to judge you for what you put on a plate.
But for the first time ever, we've had a dish served tonight by you that you didn't make, which contravenes the rules of MasterChef.
Oh, Tyler I am so sorry.
But your journey is going to end Tonight.
Honestly, from the bottom of my heart, young man, we've seen your journey go from this up to there, and we had no idea it was going to end like this.
But you must promise yourself that you'll continue cooking, because you're gonna make it.
I think you're that good.
Thank you, chef.
Anything you'd like to say to us before you go? Again, I apologize for what happened.
I understand your decision, and I appreciate everything you guys have allowed me to do.
Jaimee, I apologize.
I'm sorry.
I had no intent on doing that.
No, I'm sorry that you grabbed mine.
And, hey, at least if they would've tasted it, it would've tasted pretty damn good.
So thank you.
Uh, Tyler, please take off your apron, place it on your bench.
Good luck, my man.
- Thank you, guys.
- Thank you.
Keep cooking.
- I'm sorry.
- Thank you, chef.
- Appreciate that, chef.
- Good luck, man.
Thank you.
This is devastating, but I feel like the judges made a fair decision.
You break the rules, you pay the price.
I broke the rules.
- Good job.
- Thank you.
MasterChef changed my life.
Hopefully it leads to better things.
My dream hasn't changed.
I get knocked down, but I get back up.
This isn't the end.
It's only a detour.
Listen, that hurts, let me tell you.
That was a very sad ending.
But the competition has to go on.
And we have had some great dishes tonight.
But there is one dish that literally hit all the high notes.
This person will also have a huge advantage in a game-changing position in the next challenge.
The best dish of the night is Little miss tippy-toes.
Courtney, well done.
Great dish This victory doesn't feel as good as the first one Just in light of everything that happened.
But it is validation that I am supposed to be here.
From here on out, it's nothing but perfection, and I'm going to win this thing.
There are 15 home cooks tonight standing in front of us.
What's ahead is never gonna be easy.
Good night.
Next time on MasterChef You will be cooking in pairs.
Uh-uh.
No, thank you.
The home cooks meet their match Girl, we got it.
as teammates Let's be honest.
Leslie's your bitch.
quickly become enemies.
I have an idiot as a partner.
Hell, yeah, I'll whup his ass.
And a performance so shocking Do the honors.
Two could be going home.
Both of you have got one foot out the door.
This season on MasterChef The best home cooks in America are battling it out for the ultimate culinary prize.
Wow, it is beautiful.
I just wanna eat more and more of it.
Watch out for Willie.
He's gonna bake.
What can I say? The pressure to succeed Come on! I don't know how else to put "sorry.
" You're not sorry at all! has divided the kitchen.
No more eating! I've worked my ass off.
You know what work is? You [bleep] live in Malibu.
But tonight You will be cooking in pairs.
Uh-uh.
No thank you.
allegiances will form Girl, we got it.
and bitter rivals will clash Hell yeah, I'll whup his ass.
I have an idiot as a partner.
resulting in a performance so shocking Do the honors.
Two could be going home.
Both of you have got one foot out the door.
It is top 15, I've got my mojo back, and I'm feeling like I'm walking a little taller, and it has nothing to do with how high my heels are.
I'm a server from Orlando, Florida, and I cook Michelin style.
My palate is ridiculous and there's no competition, man.
I got this.
There are 15 home cooks standing in front of us, but we need to take you 15 cooks and narrow you down to just one.
So far, we've thrown mystery boxes at you, elimination challenges, pressure tests, and team challenges.
And in tonight's challenge, you'll once again be cooking in teams.
But tonight, the team dynamic will be slightly different.
You will be cooking in pairs.
Leslie, the million dollar question.
Who would you not want to work with? You can't pick all 14.
I think "Iran" and I do not get along together, as far as in the kitchen.
- Ahran.
- Ahran, yes, Ahran.
Ahran, do I even need to ask you who you don't want to work with? I don't think so.
Christian, who's the last person you want to cook with? Courtney.
She had the best dish in the last challenge.
Don't care.
She's just not real.
She don't have passion.
I--just not my cup of tea to cook with.
Uh-uhh, no thank you.
Courtney, because you had the best dish in last challenge, you will be choosing everyone's teams tonight.
Yes.
And as an added bonus, you'll not have to cook in tonight's challenge.
Take those glamorous heels and please, yet again, head up to the balcony.
Thanks.
Careful you don't catch those heels on the staircase.
I won't.
Got lots of practice.
I'm no stranger to the balcony.
It's like my second home, so I feel like this is where I'm supposed to be.
So, Courtney, there are 14 cooks, and you need to separate them into 7 teams consisting of 2 cooks.
The two worst performing teams in tonight's challenge will go into a pressure test that will send at least one person home.
So, Courtney, give us the first person you'd like to pick for team one.
The first person? That'd be Christian.
Now, Courtney, who you gonna partner Christian up with? The person that I'm going to pick, I think that their personalities will be what causes struggle between the two.
- Clash? - Yeah.
So I'm going to choose Francis B Francis B.
Interesting.
What's up, my man? I think Courtney sees me as a threat, and she's probably thinking Christian and I would probably butt heads Let's do it.
But we're gonna hit it out of the park.
All right, Courtney, let's build the second team.
Okay, we'll bring down Jaimee and Elizabeth.
Okay, Courtney.
Victoria and Christine.
Cutter with Dan.
I'm gonna ask big Willie to step down, and Daniel.
I'm gonna bring down Ahran.
If I'm paired up with Leslie, honestly, I might die in a hole, because it's so unfair.
And I'm choosing Leslie.
The two remaining, please step down, Francis L and Elise.
Let's go.
Wow, fascinating picks.
Okay, it's time to find out what you'll all have to cook as a team.
Please, head back to your stations.
Why are they so big? Now, as a team, we want you to conceive, cook, plate, and serve us your dish together.
Two different home cooks, two very different personalities, two different styles.
That's why we want you to make us something that starts as two very different components, but come together in one classic pairing.
We want you to cook us a surf and turf dish.
Yes! Yes! Bam! Yeah.
Look at what you have to choose from.
I'm pretty amped up, because it's the interpretation of surf and turf, which is really exciting.
There's just so many different routes you can go with this.
Rib eye steaks with crawfish etouffe, bacon-wrapped pheasant with a crab stuffing.
I mean, I am not feeling worried whatsoever.
From the land, you have pork belly, short ribs, lamb rack, venison loin, chicken, and veal chop.
And from the water, you have ahi tuna, monk fish oysters, red snapper, octopus, and clams.
All these amazing ingredients you can find in that amazing pantry, along with everything else you need to make us one stunning surf and turf dish.
You'll have just one hour to put aside all your differences and work together to serve us the best dish of your lives.
But you'll have five minutes to go in the pantry, decide together what the direction your dish is heading, and get everything you need to make that stunning surf and turf dish.
Make sure you get everything you need and forget nothing.
You're not allowed to return to the pantry after you exit.
Your 60 minutes starts Now.
Yeah, go, Leslie.
Okay, so I think you're comfortable with the tuna.
I do like a--I'd like to do a soft boiled egg.
I definitely think we should do lamb and snapper.
Cut it super thin We slice it, and then we can, like-- wrap it? I've made, like, a burrito before using pork belly, and I've made, like, a kimchi fried rice and guac, but we can add the crab to it.
Tell me what you want me to do.
I have no problem with that.
Now, there's seven teams of two back there.
Do you think somebody's gonna break off and be the captain, like, right away? You're gonna have a dominant member of each team.
What I would like to do is east-west, and it's a venison, and it's gonna be sliced, and we're gonna do tuna sashimi.
So you have two lean proteins going together, that's the only thing.
I was thinking of doing a chess board with the tuna.
- A chess board with the tuna? - Oh, I don'tI don't know.
The dynamics are critical, who drives what.
I think basically put two variations of a similar sauce, but not the same sauce.
We're still making two separate You see what I'm saying? If you're doing vegetables and fish, I'm doing protein and meat, we're not marrying the dishes together.
He is not listening to what I'm trying to tell him.
These proteins don't go together.
You need something to balance each other out.
It's the whole idea of this.
We have to marry it together.
I think we're over-thinking that.
No, I don't.
I think that's what he said.
That's exactly what he said.
He's going into Dan shut-down mode.
He still can't figure out what all vegetables he's using and Five minutes gone.
Time's up.
That's it.
Let's go.
We're gonna have to go with this.
We have two proteins that do not pair together, and seven items out of the pantry.
I'm just praying that we can pull it off.
Just listen, okay.
You've picked everything, just let me talk.
Could you make a blackened, seared ahi tuna? Yeah.
This guy has got some brutal fins.
Yeah.
You're looking good over there.
We're gonna be doing a pork belly-wrapped monk fish over a green apple risotto.
Just trying to get as many flavors as we can in there.
Right now, we're gonna make a rib eye steak.
We're gonna keep it very american, you know, green beans, red potatoes with a king crab cream sauce going on top of the steak.
To be honest with you, Francis is awesome.
I mean, the dude is great, he can cook his ass off, so I don't have anything negative to say about Francis B.
All I can say is thank you, Courtney.
Just over 45 minutes to go.
All right, Francis, what's going on here? We have the magic ingredient, xanthan gum.
Oh, delicious.
So are you making a frothy, bubbly action, a sauce Gonna make a blood orange foam to garnish at the end.
We have a mint and lemon caviar I'm making, and then also, we're making crab risotto with rack of lamb.
So who is the leader of this team, guys, - who's leading? - This was my idea.
Is your idea to cut the onions ten times as big as they should be? All right, Cutter, Dan Wu, explain the dish please.
So what we've come up with is, like, a chilled venison slice that's been cooked, and then a warm tuna salsa like a soy sauce with tuna chunks on it to go over the top, and eat it, like, sashimi-style.
Right.
Why's it cooked, then? Are we definitely on the same page? Guys, are we okay? - Cutter? - No, I ain't okay.
I ain't gonna lie.
No, I ain't okay.
Dan goes off on a wild tangent in the [bleep] pantry, and by the time we got out, we're out of time.
So now, it's basically a mystery box now.
I am just so pissed off at Dan Wu right now, because I mean, he just does not listen to anything, and I even tried to tell him, "You know, we can't do this, we have to do something else.
" So I know I'm probably going to a pressure test, because I have an idiot as a partner who just wouldn't listen to me.
With just over halfway to go in the surf and turf team challenge, Dan and Cutter's partnership is already falling apart.
- Guys, are we okay? - No, I ain't okay.
I ain't gonna lie.
No, I ain't okay.
Dan goes off on a wild tangent in the [bleep] pantry, and by the time we got out, we're out of time.
So now, it's basically a mystery box now.
Okay, listen Look at me.
Have a meeting amongst yourselves, get it together, 'cause it sounds insane.
Yeah, we don't have any ingredients, we don't have anything to work with.
But have a think about this one, guys, yeah, because it doesn't sound right.
Okay.
Give me a sauce.
Give me a sauce for radishes.
Cutter, under pressure, when things aren't going perfectly, he flips out, and I'm like, "Let's not worry about it.
Let's just put something on a plate.
" - So, Christian - Yes, chef? You were the prime target today.
- Yes, I am.
- How does that feel? It's all right with me.
Why do you think she put Francis on your team? I can't figure out that angle.
Because she feels that we're alpha males.
I mean, we want to be in control, but Do you think that your personality's intimidating or your cooking? Cooking, and my personality, 'cause I don't take [bleep] from nobody.
Oh, god.
Uh, Ahran, Leslie, first of all, the energy looks great.
- Thank you.
- What's the dish? It's a spicy pork belly and sweet crab stack with pico de gallo, guacamole, and kimchi fried rice.
Right.
Who's the head chef? "Iran" "Iran" is the head chef.
"A," "ah.
" Just shout, "ah!" - "Ah!" - "Ran.
" - "Ran.
" - One more.
- Ran! I'm sorry, Ir Every time you say "I," it pisses her off.
I, I, I sorry, I One more, "Ah.
" - Ah-ran.
- Thank you.
Youngest in the competition, you're still growing with confidence every hour, 'cause right now, let's be honest - Yes.
- Leslie's your bitch.
Good luck.
Just under three minutes left, guys, just under three minutes.
Here, taste the orzotto.
Are we looking good, Daniel? Looking good, my man, looking good.
I haven't hit it with butter or cheese yet.
- Oh, that's good, though.
- Yeah? Wow, the energy is incredible.
Yeah.
Victoria and Christine are doing a play on pork belly and monk fish with a green apple risotto.
Sounds really nice and classy.
I think one of the strangest pairings is Scottish Francis and Elise.
You couldn't have two more opposite cooks with different life experiences - than those two.
- They could definitely be in danger.
I mean, that's a weird one.
Let's go, guys, last finishing touches.
Just over 30 seconds to go.
Let's go, come on.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
Hands in the air! Well done.
Now, it is time to taste your dishes.
First up, Ahran and Leslie.
So, youngest competitor, oldest competitor, put together and chosen to work together by Courtney because she wants you out of here, Leslie, more than anybody.
How's it look from up there? I think that they worked together very well and put a nice dish on the plate.
All right, so tell me exactly what we have.
So it's a fried tortilla topped with kimchi fried rice, crab guacamole, spicy pork belly and pico de gallo, and a cilantro-lime crema.
Flavors are great.
It's really well thought out.
So you have a new respect for Leslie? You know, I respect him as a cook and as a person, and I think that this, like, partnership was really kind of the stepping stone into that.
That's awesome to hear.
Good job, guys.
You know, this dish has a lot of things going for it, but the main compliment I could pay this dish, - that it's harmonious.
- Yes.
This is a true marriage of two cultures, and certainly from different generations coming together to make one delicious dish.
An excellent job by both of you.
- Thank you.
- Thank you.
- It's delicious.
- Thank you.
It really is.
I mean, everything is seasoned beautifully.
Really worked well.
Hatchet buried? Finished? - Yes, we're - Give one another a hug.
There you go, excellent.
Seriously, well done.
Great job, both of you.
Thank you, chef.
Give me five.
Good job.
Thank you.
Next up, let's go, Dan Wu and Cutter please, thank you.
Dan Wu and Cutter's plate is empty, and it's not very pretty.
What in the [bleep] is that? I am so embarrassed.
That pantry is stocked.
There are professional restaurant and kitchens that don't match what we've set up in there for you.
And that's what I get.
Somebody give it to me, will you? - Tell me what that is.
- I'll tell you - exactly what happened.
- Please.
- Go in the pantry - Please.
He has an idea, I listen to him.
I told him I didn't like it, he just starts grabbing [bleep], and this is what you get.
Ran out of time in the pantry, then I have nothing to work with.
We went in there, I gave my idea, he gave his idea, we grabbed the proteins, and we started from there.
We went back and I specifically told you that neither when they're both lean, they don't go together.
We didn't get enough ingredients to really make anything work.
But you didn't know have an idea.
You didn't have anything real at the end, what you wanted to do.
You were just grabbing stuff, and you kept telling, "We'll get it as we go, we'll get it as we go.
" So both of you pick up a basket, fill it up, and then bring it back.
At least you got something tangible to work with.
By the time we hit our station, there was nothing we could do in terms of ingredients.
We had what we had, so the way this dish tastes, I will take responsibility - for it, 'cause that's my vision.
- Well, I think it actually came out decent.
Through all the stuff, I think it actually came out tasting decent.
Describe the dish.
It's a seared venison loin on a bed of cauliflower and parsnips.
On the other side is a seared tuna marinated in some ponzu-yuzu soy on a three radish salad.
Even separate identities, it still doesn't work.
That is possibly one of the worst dishes in this competition so far.
Man.
You don't have to eat it.
Really, you don't.
I'm a judge here, so why don't you let me figure out what I have to do and what I don't have to do.
I know how to do my job.
Do the honors.
You don't have to eat it.
Really, you don't.
I'm a judge here, so why don't you let me figure out what I have to do and what I don't have to do.
I know how to do my job.
Do the honors.
Thank you very much.
There's no point in playing the blame game.
I'm not gonna do it.
If I'm gonna blame anybody, it's gonna be myself, because I am responsible for what I do, and it's a cowardly thing, what he did.
I'm just so mad, because I know that this leads to a pressure test, which leads to a greater chance of me going home.
Next up, Francis, Elise.
Francis, describe the dish please.
It is a baked-with-yogurt rack of lamb with a crab risotto and blood orange foam with lemon and mint caviar.
Uh, lamb, yeah, it's nice, but you took that lamb out, the fat was still on there, and then you smeared it with yogurt.
You can't put yogurt on top of fat.
Fat needs to be rendered, or you remove it and put a crust on there.
I did sear the lamb before there was anything put on it, and then I roasted it in the oven.
Yeah, it came out, you let it rest, and then you smeared it back over with yogurt.
And visually, it looks a mess.
I mean, the lamb looks like a dog's chew, caviar looks like frog spawn.
I love lemon caviar, because the lemon is great with crab and the mint is great with the lamb.
Yeah, I like the quirkiness, but it needs to have a right time and a right place on a right plate, Not in surf and turf.
So unimpressed with both of you.
Jaimee and Elizabeth, come on up.
Explain your dish to me.
Red snapper cooked with lemon.
Yogurt-marinated lamb and topped with a little roasted carrots and crumbled feta.
Everything is seasoned perfectly.
The lamb is a perfect medium rare with a nice char on it, the fish is delicate and light, and I think that it really captures the spirit of what we were looking for, because we weren't looking for a literal translation of surf and turf.
This is a concept on the plate.
- Thank you.
- Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Next up, big Willie, Daniel, let's go, please.
You have a seared ahi tuna on top of forbidden rice and radish, and then, we have egg and crispy skin roll, and a buttermilk miso fried chicken.
First of all, you've captured the spirit of the surf and turf, and you've got that creativity on every aspect of that dish, which looks great.
Chicken is incredible.
Tuna cooked beautifully.
Little bit too much going on.
Doesn't need the fried veg on top.
I don't want anything fried on top of fried, however, the flavors are there.
It has character.
Well done.
Thank you.
Thank you, chef.
All right, next up please.
Christine, Victoria.
Wow.
Plate looks beautiful.
Please describe your dish.
We've got a pork belly, wrapped monk fish over a green apple risotto with a apple and pork belly salad.
It's a dish that's labor intensive, creative, and show a lot of that classic technique.
You guys haven't really been in the top three individually, and now, as a team, you're shining.
This is a really good dish, so good job.
- Thank you, chef.
- Thank you.
Thank you.
Good job.
Christian, francis Biondi.
I'm confident that Christian and francis B's egos are going to get in the way of creating a good dish.
So it's a moroccan rub rib eye with a creamy herb king crab topping, roasted red potatoes, green beans with crispy bacon, tossed in arugula oil.
So here's the thing, Christian, Courtney wanted you out, big target on your back.
Then you're paired with Francis B, smart, articulate, but each one of you could have done this dish on your own in 20 minutes.
Christian, I love it when you step up to the plate with the arrogance that you're a front-runner.
Francis B, front-runner, but I'm not feeling it.
So I'm underwhelmed.
Be honest with you, you know, seeing those other dishes come up here and whatnot, I just feel we could've gave a little more creativity.
But, guys, come on.
You're in this competition, thousands didn't make it, And it looks like the wrong two standing in front of me, 'cause this looks like school dinner.
It's bland.
Steak is embarrassing.
Here's the thing, somebody's going home, And right now, both of you have got one foot out the door, 'cause if I give you another 60 minutes, individually, to do a surf and turf, It'd be ten times better than that [bleep].
Courtney, well played.
Thank you, chef.
Seven pairs, seven dishes.
One team created a pretty phenomenal surf and turf dish, a dish that was somewhat head and shoulders above tonight's competition, a dish that we would've liked to have seen in one of our restaurants That's how good it was.
That dish belonged to Victoria and Christine, well done.
What? Give it up, girl! Both of you, please head up to the gallery.
You are safe from elimination, easily safe.
Three other duos did an amazing job tonight, And are also safe from elimination.
Well done Jaimee and Elizabeth, Daniel and big Willie, and finally, Leslie and Ahran.
Great job.
Brilliant.
I never thought in a million years that I'd be saying this, But Leslie and I really pulled it together, and honestly, I would love to work with him again.
Which leaves us with three pairs.
Please come down to the front.
Let's go.
There's one team that is safe from elimination tonight.
The other two will face the dreaded pressure test.
Screw it.
I'll take my chances in the pressure test, and if this is how Courtney is gonna send me out, you know, this is how I'm going out.
Right now we need a minute to decide.
Excuse us.
So Dan Wu and Cutter, right? I mean, Cutter should've stepped up, should've said something.
He is down there looking at me like I sent him to his grave.
Christian and Francis? - Dish was not what we asked for.
- Lazy.
Just looking at everything that they had, you know, we should've put more creativity in the bowl.
I know, you take two overconfident, cocky people, and they fail.
Francis L and Elise.
I think Elise is out of her element.
I'm sorry, I didn't know it was going wrong.
All right, ready? You know all three dishes were underwhelming.
We definitely deserve to be in the pressure test, and Christian and I both know it.
We look at each other, we're like, "This is not what we should have put out there", and we're gonna be tested for it.
I am shocked that we're in the bottom three.
I know we had some technical errors, but I really think that we have gone out on a limb with this dish.
The team that are safe from that dreaded pressure test is The team that are safe from that dreaded pressure test is Christian and Francis B.
It's not you.
Elise and Francis L, get yourselves up to the balcony.
Let's go.
Francis and I both deserve to be safe.
At least we were being creative.
I'm in this pressure test because of Dan Wu just being so scatterbrained.
I mean, I'm just pissed off at the whole situation.
You four home cooks standing before us cooked us the worst dishes of the evening.
And because of that, you four home cooks will now be cooking against each other in a pressure test.
Forget that you were part of a team.
Now, it's every man for themselves.
There's a part of me that actually feels good going into the pressure test 'cause I don't have to deal with the debacle that was Cutter.
It's time to find out what you'll have to cook in tonight's dreaded pressure test.
This is America, the land of meat and beautiful seafood, but this country also grows some of the best vegetables anywhere in the world.
We've had our surf and turf, so now, we're asking for one of the most technical vegetarian dishes to get right.
It's practically on every asian takeout menu.
This is a tough one.
Delicious, incredible, Spring rolls.
Served with a delicious dipping sauce.
I love spring rolls, but I've never taken the time to make spring rolls.
It's gonna be hell, but this is the game.
You know, this is what you're here for.
Light.
Crispy.
Crunch, and look at that, bursting with flavor.
Absolutely delicious.
- Dan, where were you born? - China.
This is something you're familiar with.
I have made them before.
Wow, thanks for the softball toss to Dan Wu, who screwed me right before.
Man, I am not looking forward to what's about to come.
There are so many ways that you can mess this up.
If you get the wrapper wrong, you're going home.
If your filling doesn't work, you're going home.
And if the sauce is nothing more than an afterthought, well, I think you know where I'm going here.
It's the end of your time in the MasterChef kitchen.
Okay, you four, it's time to head to your stations.
All of you, please put on your black aprons that you'll find in front of you.
You all have the exact same ingredients.
Flour, eggs, a vast array of farm fresh vegetables, hoisin sauce, plum sauce, soy sauce, togorashi, and mirin.
Don't be limited by anything except your own imagination.
That could be the difference between safety and elimination.
You have just 60 minutes to make us six stunning spring rolls and a delicious dipping sauce.
Do not forget, your entire MasterChef hopes and dreams are wrapped up in this challenge.
Your 60 minutes starts Now.
Never made a spring roll before.
We'll just see how it come out.
I'm going home today.
If I don't get this right, I'm going home.
I've made quite a few dumplings and wontons and stuff like that in my day, so this is in that same ball park.
I'm the guy to beat.
I feel pretty confident.
I do feel I'm one of the stronger cooks, for sure.
I am not going home today.
Spring rolls, a shocker, right? The pastry is basic, it's flour, egg, and water, but tonight, this is all about rolling that dough wafer thin.
We are expecting restaurant-level spring rolls.
No excuses today.
Cutter, Texas man.
Obviously, not very happy to be in this pressure test.
- Not at all.
- Ever made spring rolls? Never made 'em.
Only eaten 'em.
You feeling confident? I hope I survive.
If you're not going home, who is? I think it should be Dan.
Really, Dan Wu? I mean, he lived in China for years.
If that guy can't nail a spring roll, there's something wrong with him.
Exactly, he better nail it better than anybody here.
-Good luck.
- Thank you.
Dan Wu, Dan Wow.
- Hey, Dan.
- Yes, sir.
So you should be the hands-on favorite here, huh? I hope so.
So what's the technique? What are you doing here? I'm just trying out the pasta machine To see if I can get a smoother roll out of it.
Well, why wouldn't you just use the traditional rolling pin? It's slow and I'm not that great at it.
Dan's smart, though, with that pasta roller.
Guys, under 30 minutes left to cook.
Francis, how you doing? Doing all right, chef.
Don't forget the sauce.
That's equally important.
How is your sauce? You feel confident? I'm feeling confident in the sauce.
I like the flavor profile.
It seems like you're not the same Francis that we saw just a few weeks ago.
Maybe I got in my own head with the last failure that I had.
You gotta bounce back.
You gotta make it happen.
You really have to stand out.
I've got to.
Christian, what's your strategy in spring rolls? What's gonna give it the bang is my sauce.
Without the proper spring roll filling, the sauce is meaningless.
When I crack your spring roll open, if it don't look right, I ain't putting it in the sauce, I'll put it in the trash can again.
I don't think you're gonna do that, chef.
We might be sending more than one person home tonight.
What? At least one may be going home.
Only thing that was going through my mind was, "Stuff these bad boys, get 'em in the fryer, 'cause I can't be going home.
" Ten minutes, guys.
Ten minutes remaining.
These need to go into a hot fryer so they blister on the outside, so it lightens up the dough.
Totally.
So Gordon, who's going home? I'm really nervous about Francis B.
He is out of his depth.
He is the only one of these four home cooks who's competed in a pressure test before, so he has that experience under his belt, but I don't think there could have been a more severe blow given to Cutter than an Asian dish, especially as difficult and technical as spring rolls.
He's trying his hardest, but I just don't know if he can do it.
The one that looks in control more than anybody is Christian.
Oh, one of his busted open.
Oh, my god.
I look in the fryer, and one of my egg rolls is coming apart.
God! I've only got a few minutes left, I've got to roll out another one.
I'm not gonna have enough to go on the plate.
Five minutes, five minutes.
It'll be automatic failure, automatic go home.
Oh, my god.
Looking over at Cutter, and he's freaking out.
Just one more, just one more.
Cutter's going home, no question.
Oh, [bleep] you very much, Courtney.
I put egg wash on one of my sides and they come out apart of the fryer.
I think six perfect spring rolls on the plate, if we had a couple minutes to pull this off.
- Gotta time.
Gonna try it.
- Two minutes to go.
- Francis B, how you're doin'? - Just hoping the spring rolls come out.
Right.
And why they're so anaemic looking? Why so white? They just look like sad spring rolls I want a delicious spring rolls, right? Let's go.
I thought I had hot fryer.
But they are floating onto the top and are still really white.
So I put some oil in the pan and I'm just hoping the brown off alright and have a nice crispy crust to it.
Francis B is putting his spring rolls in the pan.
You can't fry a spring roll twice 'cause it will be greasy.
Greasy spring roll can slide you out of MasterChef kitchen.
Get them all on the plate, guys! Taste that dipping sauce.
You don't count on the fryer.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one, stop.
Hands in the air.
Okay, well done, all of you.
Please, very carefully bring your six spring rolls down to the front, thank you.
Let's go, guys.
Thank you.
When I look at everybody else's spring rolls, I can immediately see that all of them lack any real finesse.
So, Christian, tell me exactly what we have in here.
Chef, this is a vegetable medley spring roll with red cabbage, green onion, carrots, and the dipping sauce is a spicy glaze sweet sauce.
The flavor's great.
The vegetables are nice.
I would've loved to have seen a little more of that herb flavor ming through, maybe some garlic cooked down with the veg, and the main thing, I think, is just even rolling, so that it protects it and gives it nice and crispy all the way around.
Like, this one looks a lot better.
Yes, chef.
Thank you.
Thanks.
If you had ordered from your local takeout That was delivered to your house, what would you think? I think that they're probably better than average, just 'cause they don't have that funky cabbage smell.
Okay, Francis.
I have glass noodles in there, purple cabbage, carrots, some fresh sprouts, and a mushroom.
The ratio of filling is obviously way out of proportion, wouldn't you say? Okay.
These are really greasy.
You fried them in cold oil? I thought it was hot.
Generally, cold oil penetrate, and then they get greasy.
Have you eaten spring rolls like this in Orlando a lot? No, not like that.
Well, if you go home tonight, you could order in some spring rolls.
It's not complete.
Too much wrapper, greasy.
It's totally out of balance.
Dan, describe your spring rolls please.
I've got the vermicelli noodles, water chestnuts, snap peas, scallions, red pepper, and oyster mushrooms.
Dipping sauce? Soy, sriracha, a little ponzu, some mirin, and plum sauce to give it a little bit of sweetness and kind of thicken it a little bit.
- Sauce is delicious.
- Thank you.
Spring rolls taste nice inside.
A little bit too much of the casing, so it's, like, crunch after crunch.
I'd expect you to come up with something better, to be honest.
I wanted you to give everybody else in this room a master class, 'cause this is in your backyard.
That was not your best.
Yeah, dipping sauce, really tasty.
But the size of the spring roll was insufficient for the so there's more dough than Yeah, that's not good.
Okay, Cutter.
It's a bell pepper, carrot, mushroom, and bok choy filling.
What's this? It is a lemongrass and mint-infused plum sauce.
There's, like, a teaspoon of it.
What's inside? What vegetables? Oh, these are kind of not crispy.
Look how thick that is.
There's hardly any filling here.
It's all dough.
Damn it.
Very sweet.
No heat, no acid at all? I put a little bit of vinegar in there, kind of cut it a little bit.
You think if you had another teammate, you wouldn't be here right now? Yes.
If you go home tonight, would you send Dan Wu a postcard from Texas? No.
Some people just don't work well together.
Sometimes, you don't work that well on your own.
Very sweet.
No heat, no acid at all? I put a little bit of vinegar in there, kind of cut it a little bit.
You think if you had another teammate, you wouldn't be here right now? Yes.
If you go home tonight, would you send Dan Wu a postcard from Texas? No.
Some people just don't work well together.
Sometimes, you don't work that well on your own.
I'm surprised Cutter's still here.
He's hanging on by the skin of his teeth.
Guy's got nine lives, but I think he's used up most of them at this point.
That was a hard-fought, difficult pressure test, one of the hardest that we have ever asked any of our home cooks to do in this kitchen.
Unfortunately, at least one of you will be going home.
We need a moment to chat.
I think that Cutter's dough was, like, thick, but not greasy, though.
Francis's were definitely more in the grease department.
Francis taking 'em out of the fryer and putting 'em in a pan? And then you bit into it, it was greasy.
Dan Wu's sauce was awesome.
It looked like sauce from a restaurant.
But let's be honest, I mean, his, in general, doesn't work.
Christian, step forward, please.
By far The best spring roll tonight.
Congratulations.
Head up to the balcony.
Well done.
You are safe from elimination.
The only person that can send me home is me and the judges, not Courtney, and in due time, she's gonna fall on her face.
Dan Wu, step forward, please.
We had high expectations for you.
We really expected more.
The saving grace was that sauce, and your sauce is the only thing that is saving you tonight.
We said at least one of you will be leaving this kitchen tonight.
Francis and Cutter, I'm afraid you are both, both in big trouble.
Holy snickies.
Cutter.
You're leaving The floor, and joining the rest of them upstairs in the balcony.
Say good-bye to Francis B.
Cutter, that wasn't a victory.
That was a lucky escape.
Francis B, the spring rolls were cooked twice.
I bit into a mouthful of grease.
The sauce didn't make sense, it was too gloopy, and the whole magic of the spring roll, that was miles away.
You were definitely a front-runner, and then we saw the fall of Francis B, and it was a free fall.
It's kind of ironic that Courtney was really targeting Christian and put you as the anchor to his leg, but you wound up being the one to sink.
Damn.
Come say good-bye.
Good luck.
Good job.
Head up.
Please put your apron on your bench and leave the MasterChef kitchen.
Good night.
There are a lot of great cooks around the country that wanted to be a part of this, and the experience of cooking in front of the judges and having them say that your dish is a standout dish, that was a great feeling.
Now, that is a MasterChef idea.
Keep an eye on this one, guys.
I don't wanna be a server for the rest of my life.
I expect more from myself now.
I feel like I take a lot of experience with me.
After being in the MasterChef kitchen you definitely leave inspired as a cook and the hope for something more.
Something better.
Next week on Masterchef the home cooks get down and dirty at a diner Club in the window! But will this all-American challenge Toast is burning! leave one team scrambled? Two pancakes! Right now! I can't make them cook faster! Table two is leaving in one minute.
Do not let it make it out here without it being perfect! - followed by - Red velvet cake.
An all-American pressure test.
in MasterChef history.
This is almost an impossible misson.
You've got 60 guests, the bride and groom and they're waiting! Tonight They get a taste of Americana running the kitchen of an all-american diner.
We are open for business.
It's a classic menu One club.
It's a chaotic kitchen - Two pancakes! You hear me? - Got it! with hungry customers.
Can I join you for dessert? Absolutely.
One team will be sunny-side up.
Team blue! Let's go, you guys.
Y'all are amazing! And the other will get fried.
Toast is burning! Table two is leaving in one minute.
Do not let him make it out here without it being perfect! It all starts right now on the great American Masterchef.
Our remaining 14 home cooks head into the heart of Culver city in Los Angeles for a team challenge that will test their skills and speed.
It is top 14.
Now it's really becoming apparent who's the stronger competitors and who's the weaker competitors.
Based on actual cooking skills, at the top we have Courtney, Christine, Willie, Jaimee I would put myself in the top, absolutely.
I'm going into another team challenge.
I don't want to get too excited or too depressed.
I don't know what it's gonna be, who's it gonna be with.
- Oh.
- Hey.
Look who's here.
What's up, guys? How's everything taste? Uh, delicious.
Good morning, guys.
Come on in.
So I'm looking at this diner, and I'm thinking, man, I feel like I'm back in Texas.
I really think that's where my heart is, is that kind of atmosphere.
Welcome, everyone, to Dinah's family restaurant, one of the most iconic and busiest all-American diners in Los Angeles.
This diner serves over every single day.
And today, you 14 home cooks are going be the ones making all the food.
What? You 14 home cooks will be split into two teams of seven.
Those two teams will be covering the busiest shift of the day.
During that shift, each team will be responsible for cooking for 1/2 of the diner.
For today's team pick, things are going to be a little different.
We will decide on the team captain.
We've seen many of you perform as great leaders, but there are some of you that we feel we need to see more of.
I haven't shown my best.
And I haven't won a challenge.
And I want to show the judges that I've got what it takes.
I have my fingers crossed.
Please don't pick me, please don't pick me.
Today's first team captain captain of the red team is Christine.
Thank you.
I'm in the investment world.
I'm able to hold my own on wall street.
and this is my time to really impress the judges and let them know that I'm here to work my ass off and to win this competition.
The second team captain has a big heart, big flavors, and a big Willie, you are today's blue team captain.
I'm, like, super excited.
Here's my chance to prove to the judges that I'm not just a person with big flavors and can support a team, but I can actually lead a team to victory.
The team pick will be a little different too, because there won't be a team pick.
The two teams will consist of boys versus girls.
Whoo! Yes! Yes! Please, form your teams.
Oh, yeah.
Boys versus girls is like the best idea ever because everybody knows that girls rule and boys drool.
Oh, yeah, baby.
Kitchen diners' cooking I think it's more of a guy thing.
I don't want to insult anybody.
But I just don't see it happening with the girls.
Is everybody happy with their teams? Yes, chef! Ready to go? Yes, chef! Sorry, Graham, I'm not.
Boys and girls, for me, it's feels a bit old-fashioned.
So each team decide on one member of the opposing team that you want to have.
Oh, my god.
Start now.
She's been on the winning team twice.
And she's gonna be able to be good on the flat top.
He's worked in a restaurant like this before.
I've heard him say that he's done this before.
I'm cool with that.
I'm cool with it.
- We're good.
- Okay.
So, Christine, who are you taking from the blue team? The person I picked is someone that I've seen in action and when he's motivated, he's a beast in the kitchen.
- Who's that? - Christian.
Wow.
- Wow.
- Interesting.
When my name got called, i was like, "I love that.
" Me, by myself, all women? Who would not love that? Big Willie, tell me who you are taking from the red team.
This person has proven themselves in group challenges time and time again.
I'm choosing Victoria.
I know I haven't impressed the judges with anything that I've put on the plate, and it's great that my teammates like me, but you know, it's the judges I really want to win over in the end.
Christine and Willie, because you are the leaders, you will be the ones expediting in the kitchen.
You set the bar.
When each customer enters the diner, they'll be given a MasterChef dollar.
Then, if they like what you serve them, the customers will give your team a tip as they exit the door.
If they don't like the dish or they're not happy with the standards, clearly no tip.
The team with the fewest tips at the end of the service will face the dreaded pressure test.
Is everybody ready? Yes, chef.
Your prep starts now.
Off you go.
Good luck.
With straight-forward American diner classics on the menu, this challenge will be all about the team's timing, communication, and quality control.
- I want you to be up there with me.
- Okay.
I want you on fried chicken.
Are you comfortable with that? Yeah, I'm good with it.
You're gonna be on chicken, you're gonna be up with me.
You're gonna help Christian out with the sides, and you're gonna be on pancakes and the compote.
- Go, let's do it.
- All right, let's do this.
- Tough one.
- Totally.
Putting these contestants in the diner really will show us a lot about their ability, because it's a lot of pressure and it's the same things we're looking for.
We're looking for flavor, consistency, speed, and technique.
I need everybody focused.
Do you understand? - Yes, chef! - Yes, chef! My big worry is the expediting.
Expediting You gotta drive the team.
Three tickets in the air any one time.
- I want to see everything before it goes out.
- Okay.
Don't think they've ever worked in this kind of pressure with that kind of speed.
Guys, unless you have something to say to me, do not speak.
Here we go.
We are open for business, guys.
Let's go.
It's now time for the home cooks to serve the diner's toughest critics their regular customers.
Diners will be seated in either the blue or red section and will decide whether their team's perfomance is worthy of a tip or not.
First ticket, two fried chickens, one pancake, one egg scrambled, one club.
Heard! Pancake.
One egg scrambled, coming up! Red team! Two fried chicken, Two pancakes, you hear me? Heard, two pancakes.
Wrap it, let's go.
More customers arriving.
Next ticket, two fried chicken, two club sandwiches.
Got it! Christine is ruling with an iron fist.
Courtney, just watch the grease a little bit.
Yes, chef.
She's directing the orders.
We don't notice how busy it is.
We just know what's in front of us and what is that task.
Service, please.
With Christine's strong leadership, the red team is off to a good start.
While on the blue team, Willie is struggling to keep track of multiple orders.
I need those two sandwiches.
- What's the time? - Two? I thought you wanted three and then one, and then there's two more coming.
He wants one club sandwich, he wants two, he wants four club sandwiches.
I've made seven.
Francis, I need two clubs.
- Two more clubs? - Two more clubs.
No.
Just those two he got.
Oh, just those two? He's only got one.
Well, then you're reading out the orders are not being read out correctly.
From the get-go, Willie's overwhelmed by everything.
Food is dying in the window, blue team.
We're having club sandwiches resting in the window when pancakes haven't been fired or we're waiting on eggs.
I mean, everything just starts unraveling.
Let's go, I need this table.
Come on.
Why is table three taking so long? Okay, give me those give me those, uh uh Today's all-American diner challenge is about quality and speed.
How long on the fried chicken? Four fried chicken coming up in five minutes.
While the red team is working efficiently Service, please.
The blue team is struggling to keep up with their orders.
I need Say what.
I need Willie's the team captain.
That's great and fantastical and magical.
Unicorns riding around him all the time.
That's fantastic.
But I think he's a little confused.
I need one I've never expedited before.
I've never worked in a professional kitchen.
I am all over the place.
- Start building them like this.
- I need So it's like that with a scrambled egg is gonna be a ticket.
Yeah.
Then you got two fried chickens - with a scrambled egg and a club.
- Okay.
It's on me now.
We're behind, and it's time for me to step up and get my team back on track.
I need six fried chickens, one pancake.
Heard, chef.
Okay.
Do you have this? You want me to take over for you? I got it.
Okay.
Okay.
Order up, table eight.
How are we? - We're doing great.
- Nice to see you.
How long have you been coming here? Since it's been open.
What, since 1959? - Yes.
- Incredible.
And how does it compare? Is it up to your standards? Yeah, it's really good.
Can I join you for dessert? - Absolutely.
- I'll be back.
Hello, ladies, you're eating the dishes of the red team.
What'd you think of the eggs? Good egg cook? - Good, perfect.
- Yeah? perfect? How are we looking on those scrambled eggs, Courtney? Today's challenge will be decided by tips.
A satisfied customer will leave their team a MasterChef dollar before they leave, while an unhappy customer will head straight for the door.
Elizabeth, why is that hanging in the window? I know.
- We're waiting on clubs.
- What's it waiting for? We're waiting on clubs.
Back on the red team, incomplete orders are dying in the window as Elise struggles with the club sandwiches.
She's smushing the bread.
She's gotta stop doing that.
Real careful on the bread shumshing.
- Okay.
- Take a deep breath.
Fire it off.
Another one.
All right, let me throw this out.
Elise's clubs are not looking good.
Listen to me.
You gotta get the cut better.
Yes, yes.
Come on, we can't afford to get this sent back.
- Christine, that's the fifth time.
- I know.
The cut of the toast is wrong.
The toast isn't toasted well.
It's just looking a little wobbly.
And that's not coming out of my kitchen.
Elise, we need those sandwiches.
let's go.
You're taking too long.
Okay.
Let me tell you something about club sandwiches.
Club sandwiches are not easy.
Bread, cheese, tomato, turkey, bacon, lettuce, toast with mayo, cheese, ham, bacon, lettuce, another piece of bread.
And then everything has to be perfectly layered or your sandwich is gonna fall apart when you try to cut it.
- No, no, no.
no, no, look.
- Oh, god.
They're looking worse and worse, aren't they? Elise! I can't serve this, okay? I'm I'm I'm Yes, yes, yes.
Well, someone needs to help her.
You're blocking the service.
- Can you just go back in there - Yes.
And help right now? Without a doubt, if we lose this, i'll be blamed for the loss.
Uh, red team is struggling big time.
The club sandwiches have really backed them up.
Elise can't even cut the bread properly.
Elizabeth jumped from expediting over on to club sandwiches.
How is that possible? It's toast and lettuce.
It's one of the most popular orders.
It's such a shame, 'cause food's in the window and it's dying, and they're waiting nonstop on that club sandwich.
Come on, guys, on the clubs.
I need two clubs.
So based on what you're seeing, what are you thinking? I think Christine's behind based on the club sandwich.
And I think Big Willie's got his team, and the blue team are literally heading toward victory.
It's halfway through the afternoon rush and despite the judges' confidence in the blue team, Leslie is cracking under the pressure of the egg station.
Leslie, these eggs look different every time I see them.
You gotta keep that plating consistent, okay? They're sunny-side up.
That's the way they make 'em.
My job in this kitchen today is to make sure that quality is consistent.
That's not going out.
Look at this oil.
Less oil, Leslie.
Less oil.
And Leslie is taking it very personal.
And that's reflecting in the next Do not let him make it out here without it being perfect.
Are you kidding me? I'm busting my ass here, working three different areas.
I'm working the toast because i need toast on my plate.
i need the eggs on the plate, and I gotta go under the freaking oven and pull out the bacon and the sausages, they're two burning hot trays, and I gotta worry about burning my freaking hands, and he's yelling at me? Leslie, do you need help? What's going on? No, I don't need help! I'm good right now.
If you stop talking to me, I'll be good.
We need to communicate, Leslie.
I need those eggs.
They're coming, Willie! They're coming! I can't make 'em cook any faster! I ordered the blue team's egg breakfast.
Ah.
I don't think I'm going to tip.
I'm not gonna tip the blue team.
The eggs were okay.
The rest of the food was cold.
- Leslie, listen to me.
- What? After those two, I want you to get on toast.
Victoria, can you get on those eggs? I need to change.
Got it.
Leslie was just turning out so many subpar eggs, that Willie fires him.
Chef, how many eggs do you need? One scrambled, one sunny-side up.
Heard.
That's it.
Yeah.
Let's see how better they can do it than me.
Leslie's pace on the egg station has caused orders to back up, and the diners are getting tired of waiting.
Have you been waiting a long time? - Too long - You're hungry? - I'm starving.
I think the blue team's a little backed up.
I'm gonna go check on the kitchen and make sure that food's coming, all right? Hang in there.
Listen to me.
Table two is leaving unless they get the food in one minute, okay? One minute.
If we don't get the food out and the table gets up and you have a table of four, that's four tips that you've lost.
I have one minute for those over-easy eggs or they're walking.
We're working them in the pan right now.
We have to push it.
A table's walking out.
That is just unacceptable.
Toast is burning! Yeah, what's going on? They're leaving.
Guys, table two is walking out, table one is walking out.
Eight votes down the tube because you couldn't get the food out.
Willie, table two is gone.
Table one is walking out.
Eight votes down the tube because you couldn't get the food out.
I need an over-easy and a sunny-side up, Victoria.
Forget about it.
take 'em off the line.
These are gone.
You don't need these tickets anymore.
These are dead.
In today's fast-paced diner challenge, customers are voting with their MasterChef dollar, leaving a tip if they are satisfied with their team's performance, and heading straight for the door if they are disappointed.
What do I need on eggs? All day? We don't need no eggs right now.
They walked out.
We lost two tables.
But as the leader, I have to keep calm, but i know that, if we dont collect those tips, we can be facing the pressure test.
Willie, every tip counts.
Come on, guys.
While the blue team forges ahead, Christine's red team is back in full swing with both Elizabeth and Elise working the club sandwich station.
Club in the window.
Thank you on that club.
Service, please.
But just as things are looking up, a red customer flags down Gordon with a serious problem.
Damn.
It's just there, isn't it? No.
I'm sorry.
Christine, your chicken.
Holy [bleep].
- Christian! - Yo! We just served raw chicken.
Let me see it, let me see it.
It's raw.
It's raw.
Christian, customer's been coming here for 35 years.
Keep your standards up.
Yes, chef.
This is not good.
If we intend on serving raw chicken, then we might as well just go home and shut it down.
Unbelievable.
We're all in on our customers.
Come on, Dan.
Push it.
We can't afford any more tables to leave.
The last tickets are in, and it's all about the tips at this moment.
Have you eaten at this diner before? - 35 years.
- Wow.
You had the club sandwich? Yes.
Is it better than the food that normally is at Dinah's? - It's as good.
- As good.
Listen up, I need one more fried chicken, one club.
It means everything to me right now to get every single tip into that jar.
Club in the window! Yes! Yes! Let's go, you guys! Push it out! Did you like the chicken of the red team? I would have liked the skin crunchier.
Would you give the red team a tip? I'm I'm torn because I didn't like the green beans.
- No more tickets.
- No more tickets.
Good job! Go, you guys.
Y'all amazing.
Red team, blue team.
Yes, chef.
Your shift is over.
Please give a round of applause.
Well done.
Okay.
Joe, Graham, and myself are going to count up the tips.
And we'll see you back in the MasterChef kitchen tomorrow where the winning team will be safe from elimination.
Ladies and gentlemen, thank you so much.
Let's go.
There was a couple of moments where we fell bad.
I know, right? We had not a single table walk out.
I hope that means something.
Yeah, right? Leslie, you're being quiet.
I try and keep my mouth shut during challenges.
When will you apply that to the rest of your life? Ooh! I'm not gonna acknowledge you.
I'm just as far as I'm concerned, you don't exist, So I'm gonna leave it at that.
What do we do if we don't win? We gonna be on the balcony looking down, so that's the way I feel, you know? I feel proud that I was able to lead these wonderful cooks.
But if we do go into a pressure test, I will take responsibility for my team losing.
Walking into the kitchen today, I'm feeling a little shaky.
I haven't been in a pressure test at this point, and I definitely don't want to start now.
You want to bring on a pressure test, bring it on.
I've already been, what, through two already? Yesterday, we asked you to step up and get a taste of it's like to be in a professional working kitchen.
Both teams performed admirably.
But unfortunately, one team will be facing the dreaded pressure test.
Each team was responsible for one side of the dining room.
Each customer at the diner was asked to tip one dollar if they were satisfied with the quality of their food and the speed it got to them.
We've counted the tips.
And it's close.
Very, very close.
One team made $87 in tips and the other team made $82.
There's a difference of just five tips between teams.
That's so close.
I could be cooking today, and I have to be ready for that outcome.
The team with the most amount of tips was The team with the most amount of tips was Red team.
Well done.
Congratulations, Christine and the red team.
Please, head up to the balcony.
Thank you, thank you.
Blue team, you guys will be needing these.
I think the blue team underestimated just how well the girls can do.
Take that, blue team.
That goes out to all the men that don't want to pick a girl on their team.
Boom.
Blue team, you will now face the dreaded pressure test, where at least one of you will be walking out of those doors at the end.
Big Willie, as captain, your choice is you can now save three members of your team.
Or you can save yourself.
But if you do save yourself, everyone else on your team will have to cook.
Uh, chef Be smart.
There's a very serious pressure test coming up.
Knowing Willie, he's gonna pull, like, a good-person card and save three other people I know it.
This is a competition.
I would save myself.
I'm saving three people, chef.
Why? I am a man of integrity.
I led the team.
It's my fault.
I'm willing to take it.
Very admirable.
Tell me the first name, please, young man.
This first person that I'm going to save hadn't it been for them, we've probably would have been down by a landslide.
And for that reason, i choose to pick Daniel.
Daniel, you've been saved twice now from pressure tests.
Yeah.
Something we don't know? I don't think I've hurt anybody, - or made any enemies.
- No? And I think that's working for me.
Except for Leslie who's cackling right here, because he doesn't know how to be a grown-up.
Even though he's the oldest man here, he's a child.
Otherwise, I think I have the respect of everybody else in this kitchen.
Okay.
Head up.
Congratulations.
You're through to the next round.
Well done.
Good job.
What did Daniel do besides stand up front and do nothing when we needed him in the back? Okay, Big Willie.
Two more saves for you.
This person really shined in the kitchen in spite of everything.
Scottish Francis.
- Thank you.
- You're safe.
Congratulations.
Last choice.
This person, I was very happy with their performance, chef.
- I'm picking Victoria.
- Wow.
Thank you so much.
Go on up.
So, Willie, Leslie, Dan, and Cutter, you will all be cooking in tonight's pressure test.
One of you four home cooks are about to make their last dish in the MasterChef kitchen.
Are you guys ready to find out what you will be cooking in order to survive? Yes, chef.
Beautiful, moist, delicious Red velvet cake.
A southern classic.
Oh.
Look at it.
Elegant, delicious, beautiful.
It's a slice of magic.
You've got the cream cheese frosting contrasted with that wonderful, dense sponge.
Each layer perfectly formed a cake to die for.
Mmm.
We want at least three delectable layers of stunning cake.
Now, it's time to head to your stations.
On your stations, you'll find everything you need to make your cake Butter, flour, sugar, eggs, buttermilk, white vinegar, cream cheese, and food coloring.
Now, is everybody ready? Yes, chef.
Your 90 minutes starts Now.
You know, I'm looking to take on every challenge as a new day in the MasterChef kitchen, and hopefully it comes out well and I can show the chefs that I really am here to play.
I'm not terribly happy about having to cook in the pressure test.
I'm not happy about having to do cake, that's for sure.
All right, guys.
Red velvet cake.
What's gonna be the difficulty in making it in this challenge? The secret behind a great sponge is the density of that batter How you incorporate that sugar and the eggs.
so they gotta get that in the oven within the first 30 minutes once that batter's been made.
And the cream cheese icing has to be slightly tangy, right? And make sure that that cream cheese is thick enough to almost act as a glue.
I know, I know.
I'm always cool and calm in the kitchen.
I don't need running around like the rest of these folks around here.
I just do what I do.
Right, uh, Big Willie, how you doing? I'm doing pretty good, chef.
How many times have you made a velvet cake? - Oh, several times.
- And do you always put pecans in there? I'm gonna roast them, and then I'm gonna crush 'em up and then pat them on the side.
How do you keep your cake moist? It's about not over-working it.
So that's why I did mine in a bowl, because if you're not familiar with the mixer, you can possibly overwork it.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.
Leslie.
How do you feel about baking? I'm loving it.
There's no pressure here.
I'm just this is another walk in the park for me.
Shut up and cook.
What are you gonna do with the pistachios? - I don't know, I might dust, you know.
- Dust? It's just an idea.
What happened between you and Daniel now? You know, if Daniel's quick to criticize, but he's not quick to help, you know? I put him on my team, and instead of supporting me like I supported him, he puts a knife in my back.
And that's fine I have plenty of knives in my back.
Oh, my god, he's an idiot.
Oh, it smells good.
Well, it's smelling like something.
All right, Cutter.
Talk to me about velvet cake.
Never made one, but I've eaten plenty of 'em.
Frosting, what are you doing with the frosting? I'm doing a cream cheese frosting, maybe some little decorative art on the top? - Good luck.
- Thanks.
Ugh.
You should have your cakes in the oven by now.
My problem with baking is whatever ratio I think I have in my head I'm very leery about messing with it.
What is Dan Wu doing? But at the same time, it has to look the way it's supposed to look.
He needs to get that thing in the oven or he is gonna go home.
You can tell how thick it is.
No, no, no, not yet.
Not yet.
In this pressure test, four home cooks are tasked with creating a gorgeous three-layer red velvet cake.
Those cakes should be out the oven by now.
Part of being in this competition is getting out of your comfort zone and doing things that you may not think you can do.
I smell cake! The cakes just came out of the oven.
I mean, it's a layered cake, so it's really important that they trim them, top and bottom.
I think that's a big thing, especially for home cooks, that they don't know they pull them out and they start stacking versus slicing that little top part so that it builds like a block.
Guys, just over [bleep].
All right, guys.
This is Leslie's third pressure test.
Every time, he bounces back, he's like an old dog that you cannot put down.
Willie's got a lot of confidence.
This is right in his wheelhouse.
I'm really worried about both Dan and Cutter.
Dan Wu, you can see the cake already starting to look uneven.
You start with uneven cake, you finish with uneven cake.
- So he is not looking confident.
- Cake is brown.
Cutter in the back is doing different color icings.
I'm really surprised that Cutter is taking this much time decorating.
Yeah, but is that compensating for the lack of taste? Come on, guys.
- I'm pretty much screwed here.
- He's in trouble.
Finishing touches, let's go.
Ten seconds to go.
Nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
Cakes down.
Well done.
Well done.
Whoo! Brilliant, it's time to taste them and find out who will be leaving the MasterChef kitchen tonight.
The way my cake is looking right now, I'm happy with it.
Everything is leveled right like it just came out a bakery.
Big Willie, describe your red velvet cake.
You have a classic red velvet cake with cream cheese frosting dusted with toasted pecans.
Visually, it's slightly skew-whiff.
It slopes down.
- It's like a lazy lump.
- Oh.
However, I mean, it looks good.
Nice firm texture on the sponge.
A layer cake is all about the ratios, right? Yes.
And Big Willie.
Gorgeous.
Love the color for that nice ruby red.
Now for the taste.
Goes through beautifully with a fork.
The actual frosting is delicious.
You've really got the batter absolutely perfectly right.
- Great performance.
- Thank you.
- Great job.
- Thank you, chef.
It's moist, pretty near perfect.
I think more than anything, you've put your heart and soul on the plate.
So, delicious.
Thank you.
Leslie, good-looking cake.
What's the green stuff on top? Pistachio.
Just to add a little salt to the sweetness.
It's very good.
It's moist.
I like the addition of pistachios.
I thought I wouldn't.
Construction is good, you know? In your mind, are you starting to believe that you could actually win this? If I don't believe, who else will? - Certainly not Daniel.
- Oh, no.
None of them up there.
What are you, kidding me? Why is it that there's such antagonism toward you, Leslie? You wanna to know what? I don't know.
What's so funny? I just love how he doesn't even see his own mistakes and why everybody doesn't like him.
He's a one-trick pony.
I have to say, Cutter, i disagree.
You don't know me.
So don't even talk.
I've gotten to know you.
Trust me.
Get on your horse and ride home.
That's fine.
It is a good cake.
Thank you.
We're not here to moderate or judge wars between contestants.
That's not what we do.
We taste the food, and they don't decide who the next MasterChef is.
- I don't psh.
Doesn't bother me.
- We do.
I know that.
And that's why I'm here to impress you.
I don't care.
Wow.
That looks nice.
Mmm.
Frosting's delicious.
What's in there? A little vanilla, lots of butter, lots of cream.
and a lot of love.
I think there's something quite intriguing about the more pressure you're under, the better you become.
I'm hoping so.
- Great job.
- Thank you.
Thank you.
Dan, there was an overall feeling that you were struggling through that challenge.
What happened? I got off to a decent start, made a couple of mistakes, got frazzled.
Did not level off the cake enough.
So it's a little uneven.
It's a little hard too, compared to the other ones.
It's a little tougher to cut through.
Yeah, I overcooked it a tad as well.
You overcooked it.
And there you have it.
This is red velvet cake.
Yours is like a Boiled wool cake.
It's got like a wooly texture, not velvety and soft.
Yours has a definite homemade texture to it.
But, you know, if yours is homemade, his looks like it might be child-made, so We still got one more cake to taste.
Okay, Cutter.
Describe your cake, please.
I made a red velvet cake with equal layers with a good cream cheese frosting.
What is that on top? It's the American flag.
Okay.
Must admire how much you love your country.
I've never quite seen a flag like that.
Yeah, I know.
I ran out of time.
And the outside of the cake looks like a hairy back.
What is that? Yeah, I I shouldn't have added it.
- Do you have a hairy back? - Yeah, I do, actually.
Is it modeled on the side of that? Pretty much.
Okay, so The outside looks ridiculous.
I'm hoping inside tastes delicious.
Wow.
That's a generous portion of frosting.
Holy mackerel.
However, I'm all about taste.
Moist, delicious.
But it is so sweet.
I mean, take a little bite and just get a little gist of what I'm saying.
It's sticking to the roof of my mouth and on my first mouthful.
You cooked the sponge beautifully.
However, it's about that ratio.
You've got to get that balance right, Cutter.
Damn.
So just visually, the frosting looks really heavy.
I think it's a good cake.
I don't think it's too sweet.
I have to disagree with chef Ramsay.
I think it actually tastes pretty good to me.
I think just everybody has a different palate.
But I mean, I think it's one thing if somebody gives you their feedback for you to be humble enough to say Right, and that's what I'm trying to figure out - where the balance is - Just let me finish.
You don't want to just sit there and say, "I stand by it.
" No, no, no, I just wanted that's not I'm sorry.
That's not what I meant for it to come out like.
I just want to understand what is considered too sweet.
Well, now you know that this is considered over sweet.
You need to show him how to shut the [bleep] up.
I'm not following.
what's the discussion here? - What don't you agree with? - It's not that I don't agree.
Okay, let's change that, okay? Let's get that straight.
I'm trying to learn here.
I taste cream cheese, and that's what I'm trying to understand is what's considered more sweet.
Are you the kind of guy who lives in a delusion? - Like, if any time we tell you something - Not at all.
You're gonna become so defensive Look, I'm on the edge of going home.
I'll be honest with you.
I'm on the edge of going home.
Baking sucks for me.
Wow.
I do get defensive because I do feel like I've put my passion and my heart into everything I put in.
If you think Gordon's palate is terrible, you're allowed to think that.
That's not what I said at all.
Don't put words in my mouth.
Shut up, dude.
Cutter's just there shooting himself in the foot.
Why would you mouth off to Joe? And why would you have anything to say other than "Yes, sir"? I think that you have to have respect - for us and our opinions and what we tell - I do.
I'm trying my damndest.
All I do is get hammered.
All you do is interrupt me when I'm talking to you, and you sound ignorant, Cutter.
Baking sucks for me.
All right? - Wow.
- Yeah, I do get defensive because I do feel like I've put my passion and my heart into everything I put in.
If you think Gordon's palate is terrible, you're allowed to think that.
That's not what I said at all.
don't put words in my mouth.
Shut up, dude.
I'm trying my damndest.
all I do is get hammered.
All you do is interrupt me when I'm talking to you, and you sound ignorant, Cutter.
In your opinion, who should we send home? iI my opinion, for what you're looking for in a true MasterChef, I think you should send Leslie home.
It's all a big circle, Leslie.
You laugh, but it's all a big circle.
I'm not even talking to you.
Are you still here? Willie, Leslie, Dan, Cutter, unfortunately tonight, at least one of you is leaving this competition.
Please, excuse us.
We need a moment to discuss.
Thank you.
Willie's is great.
Yeah, I like the pecans.
Leslie's tasted delicious.
Yeah, I thought it was the best.
I've been doing this a lot longer than you, before you were even born.
The amount of icing in the center of Cutter's is way too sweet.
Gotta be able to lead and take criticism.
Yes, okay.
You're doing a terrific job.
Dan Wu's is way too dry.
I kept thinking big, red cookie.
Scandalous.
Yeah, yeah.
It's obvious.
Willie, step forward, please.
You didn't have to be down here cooking.
But by staying down here, you proved your integrity and your ability.
you're safe.
- Thank you.
- Please head up to the balcony.
Good job.
Come on, Big Willie.
Yeah, Willie! I'm ecstatic.
I came in saying I was a baker, and I've proven myself as a baker.
- Well done.
- Thank you, chef.
Amazing.
Leslie, your red velvet cake tasted as good if not better than Big Willie's.
Please, join everyone else up on the balcony.
- Thank you, chef.
- You are safe.
Dan and Cutter, unfortunately, one of you will be leaving this competition shortly.
One of you has a humble approach, one of you has a boisterous, somewhat disrespectful approach.
But ultimately, it's about what you put on a plate, how you cook across this pressure test.
I'm competing directly with Cutter who honestly doesn't want to respectfully learn and grow as a cook.
I should be the one to stay.
- Yeah? - Yeah, I think so.
I think my cake technically was done right.
It looked a lot better than his.
I deserve to stay here, and Dan needs to go home.
Dan and Cutter, let's be honest.
Both cakes had their ups and downs.
However, there was one that has the edge.
The person that will be safe from elimination and not leaving the biggest culinary competition anywhere in the world tonight Cutter you are safe.
Head up to the balcony.
Been an honor.
Dan Wu wowed us from the beginning.
Unfortunately, your cake is so dry, it's actually the texture of a biscuit.
And so, it's time for you to take off your apron and leave MasterChef.
Come say good-bye.
- Thank you for this opportunity.
- Good luck, Dan, thank you.
- Keep working at it.
- You got great flavors.
Don't stop cooking.
- Absolutely not.
Never.
- Thank you, Dan.
Please put your apron on your bench.
- Thank you.
- Good night.
Being here has been like living in a dream that I didn't even know I had.
- Dan Wu.
- Yeah! To have gotten as far as I've gotten is affirmation that I'm as good as I think I am.
Wow, that looks beautiful, Dan.
Dan Wu, Dan Wow.
- Great job.
- Thank you.
The sheer joy of learning and experiencing things I never thought I would do it's been unreal.
Next week on MasterChef A giant mystery box challenge has the home cooks confronting Gordon Ramsay.
He's like a samurai.
Done.
I mean, the guy's a master.
And the fight for a place in the top 12 This is amazing.
This is one of the best that you've put up.
Pushes the home cooks to the limit.
What's the matter? I need a medic.
Get some water, please.
Quick! You okay? Sync & correction: Ajvngou 
It's the ultimate culinary test, and tonight, the home cooks take on the biggest and most intimidating mystery box ever.
What in the hell are they gonna pull out this time? The remaining contestants go head-to-head with Gordon Ramsay.
He's like a samurai.
Done.
I mean, the guy's a master.
And the fight for a place in the top 12 This is amazing.
This is one of the best you've put up.
pushes the home cooks to their limits.
What's the matter? I need a medic.
Get some water, please? Quick.
It all happens right now on MasterChef.
Welcome, come on down.
Go to your stations, please.
So we walk into the kitchen, and we see a big, huge box on stage.
I'm from Texas.
We like everything big.
So I'm thinking, boom, right off the bat, advantage Cutter.
Oh, my god.
Oh.
There are 13 incredibly talented home cooks standing in front of us.
Don't let 13 become your unlucky number.
It's time for another mystery box challenge.
On the count of three, very carefully lift your boxes.
One two, three, lift.
Oh, a knife, huh? We're all going to be hacking at the same giant, dead creature under the giant box.
That's right.
One single knife.
Things are about to get a little cutthroat in here.
You'll be using your knife to fillet what's under this huge mystery box.
Ready to find out what it is? Yes, chef.
Oh, my god.
All right.
Salmon.
The freshest, most incredible salmon that money can buy.
Wild king salmon, line caught from the pristine waters of Alaska.
We want all of you to make us one composed, MasterChef worthy salmon dish using one of these salmon.
Oh, hell yeah.
It's time to show these clowns what I really, really got.
Now it's time for everyone to come up here and get your salmon.
This fish is not something that you can buy at your grocery store.
It's like the most amazing salmon I've ever seen.
Oh, my god.
It's totally almost as big as me.
It's a real privilege to be able to have an ingredient like this to work with today.
As you can see, there is one fish left, and it's not going to waste.
It's for us.
I'm going to fillet it, Graham's gonna cook it, and Joe I'm gonna eat it.
Is everyone ready? Yes, chef.
Just remember, each fish is worth about $450.
No pressure.
Your 60 minutes starts Now.
Let's go.
I already sliced into mine by mistake.
I'm so lost right now.
I've never filleted a fish before.
You know, I'm just hoping to muscle through it.
It's amazing that they're getting a free lesson from probably the most famous chef in the world.
And no one's watching.
Four minutes gone.
That I hacked up.
Done.
In that amount of time, I literally walked to the pantry and got a cauliflower.
That first five minutes might have been better served watching him fillet the fish than whatever you were doing, but you make your choices.
Chef Ramsay's down front, and he fillets his fish like that.
All done.
Ready for you.
And then Chef Elliot's in.
He's starting to cook.
To them, this is second nature.
Christian, how are we doing? I'm doing okay.
You've clearly filleted before.
One time.
Yeah, you've done a good job on that.
Thank you, chef.
What are you doing? Seared creole salmon.
You use king salmon for creole? I want to stay right in my little comfort zone of New Orleans.
Careful of the spices.
Yes, chef.
You've got just under - Good luck.
- Yes, chef, thank you.
I'm going to baste my salmon in a miso butter and saute broccolini.
I don't want to work in a gentleman's club again.
Winning this can change not just my life, but my family's life.
I want to make my family so proud.
I'm pretty sure I'm gonna be in the top three.
What happened to this? I know.
It looks like a shark ate it.
I know.
What did you do to it? I was washing it.
Filleting it.
What, did you gnaw it? It ended up, like, breaking down.
Wow, this is, like, a disaster.
Elizabeth, you won the last mystery box.
Yes, chef.
Talk about the dish.
What are you doing? I'm doing an herb bread crumb crusted baked salmon over a fennel-carrot puree, a cauliflower steak.
The filleting looks brilliant.
You've never filleted one before? I'm not in the market for $450 fish.
Good luck.
Thank you, chef.
Done.
Done? Damn! Like, that quick? Done? What class did you take? Wow.
Please describe the dish.
Crispy skin wild king salmon with some red beet threads, crispy golden beet, watercress, that's finished with lemon yogurt as well as a vanilla bean pistachio vinaigrette.
Very good.
Looks delicious.
Thank you.
Enjoy.
- Medic.
- What's the matter? - What have you done? - I need a medic, please.
You okay? Chair, please.
Some water, please, medic.
Chair please, quick.
Can we have some water, please, somebody? You okay? I look over, she's passing out.
I feel The pressure is so intense, and I think that Elise is just not able to keep up.
Okay, well, take Here you go.
There you go.
Just stay nice and calm.
Medic.
I need a medic, please.
I hear Elise say, "medic.
" I look over, and she's passing out.
All of you, very quickly, sadly, elise has left the MasterChef kitchen.
How was it? It was perfect.
The creamy richness of the yogurt, Salmon perfectly cooked, Light, summerful, delicious.
Perfect.
You have a future in this, kid.
Ah, I hope so.
Thank you, sir.
Elise is coming back.
Wow, just 20 minutes left to cook.
I'm okay, chef.
Are you sure? Yes, chef, I'm sure.
You've lost quite a bit of time.
You don't have to cook.
I want to come back.
I'll at least get something on the plate.
Okay, let's have a go.
You got it, Elise.
You can do it, hon.
I just completely folded under the pressure today.
So I had to take a few minutes to get my feet back on the ground.
Elise, she came back! Definitely take my hat off to you, girl.
I'm embarrassed, but Ready to cook.
Oh, my god, that's delicious.
Is Elise gonna get a dish out? I'm hoping.
She seems to have a lot more color in her face now, so fingers crossed.
Finishing touches.
Come on.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one, and stop.
Hands in the air.
Well done.
After observing and tasting throughout the challenge, the judges now take one final look to identify three standout dishes.
What happened here? The winner of this mystery box will receive a major advantage in the next round.
First up, this home cook did a great job on the filleting.
More importantly, the salmon looks like it's cooked to perfection.
The actual dish looks like it's just been popped out of a restaurant.
Congratulations Christian.
I think Christian is getting better, and he is gonna be my main competition.
Tell me what the dish is.
Blackened salmon with a vegetable medley, a little garlic, and a tomato puree.
So you must be the only person in this country tonight who had the balls to blacken a salmon.
Salmon's cooked beautifully.
Pink in the middle, seared on the outside.
Beautifully done.
Wow.
Thank you.
Love the heat coming through, but the most important is, I'm tasting that amazing salmon.
And then I get that blend of spice.
Is it a fluke, or is this you? This is me on a plate.
- Good job.
- Thank you.
The sauce and that spice mix, it's so full of flavor on different levels.
It almost makes the fish heartier.
This is one of the best that you've put up.
It's really, really good.
- Thank you.
- Good job, Christian.
- It's nothing that I would ever order - Yes, sir.
cook, or conceptualize, but at the end of the day, it really is tasty.
Have you ever won a mystery box? - No.
- Maybe tonight is your night.
The second dish that we'd like to examine further, this home cook's plating is definitely restaurant quality.
They have already won one mystery box.
Can she do it again? Please step forward, Courtney.
They call Courtney, and I'm not surprised, because they always call Courtney.
Why don't you explain to me what the dish is.
A seared salmon on top of some broccolini and an Israeli couscous, cucumber, fennel salad.
The fish is cooked beautifully.
- Look at that - Thank you.
- Color.
- Thank you.
The fact that it's not just flaking apart but it's still holding its shape.
This dish is really awesome.
Great flavors, super light.
- Good job.
- Thank you, chef.
And how did you cook the salmon? I pan seared it and basted it with some miso butter.
It's delicious.
Thank you.
Vibrant couscous, light, and it eats easily.
This has made my night.
- Well done.
- Thank you, chef.
Thank you.
Good job, Christian.
The third and final dish We'd like to take a closer look at This home cook also plated their dish beautifully.
The flavors and spices they chose were perfect to spotlight their delicious salmon.
Please step forward Elizabeth.
Elizabeth is the one to beat.
She's my wild girl.
Every time I see her plate, I go "wow.
" This is an herb bread crumb crusted baked salmon over a roasted carrot and fennel puree, a cauliflower steak with a pine nut, caper, raisin relish on the side.
Now, you know that's very courageous to bake a salmon in a competition like this.
Unless you're a real pro, you know your oven, you can overcook it in a second.
Very well done.
Good cook.
What's the seasoning in the bread crumbs? Salt, pepper, red pepper flakes, parsley, and thyme.
The herbs are not overpowering.
This dish has a lot going on.
I think you might have a real winner on your hands.
- Good job, Elizabeth.
- Thank you.
The relish is delicious.
Thank you.
Filleting skills are brilliant.
Thank you, chef.
Cool as a cucumber.
Calm as anything, and it's like your thousandth salmon.
Smart, sophisticated.
- Good job.
- Thank you.
Well done.
Three stunning dishes, let me tell you.
Sadly, only one can be the winner tonight.
I got to win this.
I've been up here before.
I was a runner-up.
I ain't trying to be no damn runner-up no more.
I'm trying to win this.
The person who paid the most respect to that stunning king salmon I'm just praying that chef Ramsay says my name.
I really, really, really want to win two in a row.
Tonight's king of the kitchen And they do it on purpose.
They speak as slowly as they can.
Put me out of my misery and say my name.
Congratulations The person who paid the most respect to that stunning king salmon Tonight's king of the kitchen Congratulations Christian.
Get outta here.
Wow.
Bam! I knocked this [bleep] Boom.
Out the park.
I'm the king.
King of the kitchen.
You did something that even we wouldn't have attempted to do.
Cajun style king salmon.
But you did nail it in a big way.
Christian, are you ready to come into the pantry and find out exactly what this huge advantage is? Yes, chef.
Let's go, big man.
Good job.
Good job, Christian.
Well done.
Thank you.
Good job.
Good job.
Thank you.
If you have done wrong by Christian in this competition so far, you should be very, very nervous.
The MasterChef pantry is where this competition can be won or lost.
Yes, chef.
For your first advantage, you will not have to cook - in tonight's elimination.
- Cool.
And for your second advantage everyone will have to cook whatever I put in this basket.
Or whatever I put in this basket.
Or whatever I put into mine.
Tonight, we'll be choosing things that we'd like to cook with, things that you may find in our fridges at home.
Then you'll get to decide which judge's basket everyone out there will have to cook with.
Give us a few minutes to do our own shopping.
Sure.
I'm the king, so I don't have to pick anything.
I'm gonna let you guys pick it.
I was very excited to see what type of flavor they have in their kitchen.
Where are the cauliflowers? Right over there, chef.
Joe, especially being Italian Merlot.
Put a lot of booze in there, a lot of wine.
It was crazy.
Joe, you have enough wine in there? We have a lot of wine, some to drink, some to cook with.
- Right? - Yes, sir.
All right, sweet.
Christian.
In my basket, you have the bounty of Italy.
A refined basket of ingredients that reflect my own incredible sensibility of fine dining and delicious food.
In my basket, you have everything that I like to get my hands on when I'm at the farmer's market.
And finally, Christian, in my basket, you have a taste of my home.
The UK, as you know, the fan of great cuisine.
Certainly, one of the most inspiring baskets.
Christian, it's time to choose.
My hearty English-inspired basket, Graham's home fresh basket, And Joe's fancy, pompous, olive oily basket.
I choose Well done.
Back in the pantry, Christian got some huge advantages.
Christian got to choose what everyone out here has to cook in tonight's elimination challenge.
Now, we gave Christian a choice of three incredible baskets curated by the finest culinary minds in the entire planet.
Those baskets were filled by Us.
That's right.
The basket that Christian chose for all of you is waiting for you in the pantry.
Oh, man, it's Joe's.
Lots of wine.
Delicious.
Joe's got a winery, so, of course, the one with four bottles of wine in it is clearly Joe's basket.
That's right, everyone.
Christian picked my basket.
Surprise.
Those are some of my favorite ingredients.
We have beautiful wine.
We have the king of all cheeses, grana padano, prosciutto san Daniele, chanterelle mushrooms, fresh artichokes, aged aceto balsamico tradizionale di modena, and, of course, garlic.
Now, is everybody ready? Yes, chef.
Your 60 minutes starts Oh, one more thing.
Christian.
Yes, sir.
There's one more advantage that we're gonna give you.
Something that you don't even know about yet.
Everyone out here will get one hour to cook their dish Except one person.
That person will only have to cook their dish.
Sweet.
And, Christian, you're gonna tell us who that person is.
This person talks a big game, walks a big game, but I want to see more.
That person Is? Courtney.
Courtney.
Wow.
- Ouch.
- I knew.
You surprised by that decision? No, not at all.
I know how amazing the advantage is, and I know how crucial it is to use it the right way.
and christian took his advantage and threw it out the window.
Now, tonight, for the first 30 minutes, I'm sorry, young lady, but you'll just have to stand by your station and watch.
For everyone else, your 60 minutes starts Now.
Who's gonna struggle, and who is gonna really excel in this competition? You know, I'm not confident with Elise.
I think she's gonna struggle big time.
I think Ahran's gonna struggle tonight.
They're not familiar with these ingredients.
I think that the obvious one is the one That's at the biggest disadvantage here, Courtney.
Strong cook, but half the time That's a big, big loss.
So I'm gonna make a porcini and artichoke ravioli.
This is the second time that I will have ever made pasta dough.
So there is definitely a lot of risk in this challenge for me.
I am very familiar with these ingredients, and I'm confident I can push through.
And it's not a 10-pound fish, so I think I'm off to a good start.
- Cutter.
- Yes, chef.
How we doing? - Doing all right.
- What's the dish? I'm gonna do some little flatbread crisp pizzas.
And why pizza dough? I like pizza, and I just want to do a spin on pizza, and I like the ingredients that we got, and I'm thinking it'll come out with a good pizza.
So it's all about what Cutter likes again, not what the judges want to see.
- Yep.
- Wow.
So how do you make your pizza dough with no yeast? I'm just gonna use an egg and some baking powder, just kind of fluff it up a little bit.
Yeah, you've got just under 40 minutes to nail it.
- Good luck.
- Thanks.
- Ahran.
- Hi.
What do you got going so far? Right now, I'm making a savory tiramisu.
What? So these are "ladyfingers" with Where did you invent that? I don't know, I just This could either be the most amazing thing ever, and I'll have to put it on my menu, or you know what else could happen.
Who do you think is most in danger to go home? I think Courtney, because of the time restraints she has.
Have you started yet, Courtney? Nope, I start in about 30 seconds.
Five seconds till she starts.
Three, two, one.
Courtney, you may start.
Thank you, chef.
Courtney, she probably had a dish right off the bat, and then he hits her - with that penalty.
- 30 minutes.
She has to rethink her dish.
I'm really worried about her.
You got this Elise.
Elise, how you feeling? - You good? - No.
Oh, no, come on.
I messed up my pasta dough, and there's nothing else I can do.
Do not give up.
This is pretty much This is pretty much over for me.
I know that the dish is gonna fail, and I'm ready to just say, like, "This is not gonna work, and I don't want to finish it, because it's gonna be a disaster.
" I'm so ready to throw in the towel.
Elise, how you feeling? You good? No.
Oh, no.
I messed up my pasta dough, so this is pretty much over for me.
Do not give up.
Why is it messed up? It's too dry.
I don't know how to incorporate more liquid into it.
I do not know what I did wrong.
Well, it's, like, slightly breadcrumby, yeah? Yes.
You cannot give up now.
- Okay? - Okay.
Come on, Elise, you got it.
There's something salvage in there.
Thank you, chef.
- No more flour.
- No more.
We don't give up.
I'm sorry, chef.
Thank you.
Continue with that.
- I'll get back on it, chef.
- You can do it, and you're not gonna throw the towel in like that.
- I will.
-There you go.
You take over the rest.
- Thank you for helping me.
- Good luck.
- All right, you pasta makers out there, you got 20 minutes, you guys.
Come on.
Hey, leslie, don't get tanked.
What, are you kidding me? I'm 56, that's all I do.
What are you making, Courtney? I'm doing some beautiful mushroom ragu with some baby artichokes on top.
so if today's her last day in the kitchen, hell yeah, let's go.
Next.
Now, that looks good.
What's the plan? Thank you.
I'm gonna make a breakfast lasagna with a prosciutto mushroom, kind of like a cream sauce, layered with fresh pasta.
Now, that sounds like something I want to eat, damn it.
Yeah, sounds like your recipe.
Big Willie.
Describe the dish.
It's gonna be a tomato soup with a fried egg on top with a flat bread.
Sounds weird.
So we're not really going Italian here.
Well, I guess not.
Good luck.
- Fascinating, huh? - Yeah, amazing.
I'm seriously concerned about Elise.
The pasta dough was dry as anything.
Like breadcrumby, right? Bread crumb.
Totally unfortunate.
At this point, with 13 home cooks left, if you can't make a fresh pasta, you shouldn't be in the MasterChef kitchen.
Look at Ahran's.
She's making a savory tiramisu.
That doesn't make sense.
Tiramisu is a dessert.
- Right.
- Does that work? If it comes out right, it could be really amazing.
Or an absolute embarrassment.
Or a complete disaster.
Two minutes remaining.
Start thinking of plating up, guys.
Good to go, Willie.
Last minute remaining.
Focus, focus, focus, focus.
Last ten seconds.
Ten, nine, eight, Seven, six, five, four, three, two, one, and stop! Hands in the air.
Well done.
Great job.
First up, the person that Christian targeted and had half the amount of cooking time of everybody else, Courtney.
Describe the dish, please.
A chanterelle mushroom ragu on top of spaghetti that I've tossed in basil-infused olive oil with crispy artichoke hearts and a crispy pancetta.
Christian put the target on your back.
How does that make you feel? Well, it was basically a compliment.
I mean, he sees me as competition, and I put everything I had into it to prove to him that I'm here to stay.
It's about the ingredients.
When you think of Italian cuisine, it's about that rustic charm.
You've brought that.
Ragu,delicious.
Love the saltiness of the ham on top.
But by and large, just looking at the dish, it looks like it took you 60 minutes as opposed to 30.
Thank you.
The artichoke, they're perfectly cooked.
You've braised them down.
You've caramelized them.
In 30 minutes, I think you did a really great dish.
- Thank you, chef.
- Good job.
Boil water, ten minutes.
Spaghetti like this, al dente, seven, eight minutes.
You didn't have much wiggle room.
- That's right.
- She played it safe.
How do you figure it's safe? I mean, from what I saw, she just threw everything in a pot and just clapped them heels, and hopefully it came together.
You, with the advantage, could've easily picked five people in this room and sent them home.
You might have wasted a pretty big advantage on a very strong competitor who shielded off your attack.
Thank you.
Thank you, sir.
Christian didn't target me.
He put a spotlight on me.
And that's where I perform the best is in the spotlight.
Next up, Cutter, please.
Thank you.
Is that it? That's it, chef.
That's it.
Holy mackerel.
Christian gave Courtney Did you give Cutter ten minutes? Describe the dish, please.
It's an artisan pizza with a basil oregano.
Hold on a minute.
Just let me interrupt you there.
An artisan pizza? Well, that's what the menu says when I go to the pizza restaurant that I like.
They call 'em artisan pizzas, and they list all the different pizzas.
An artisan pizza? No, no, but I don't know what else to name it.
Yeah, my name's Gordon Ramsay, not Stevie Wonder.
It's an artisan pizza with a basil oregano Hold on a minute.
Just let me interrupt you there.
An artisan pizza? Well, that's what the menu says when I go to the pizza restaurant that I like.
Right.
Well, first of all, I feel like I'm at a [bleep] kid's party and some mini pizzas come out.
Maybe describe it again, and I'll try hear it this time.
Okay, so I have a pizza here with a tomato, basil, and oregano sauce prosciutto and mushroom and artichoke topping.
Why a pizza? I didn't want to just throw the spaghetti in the pot and then boil the spaghetti, and I wasn't that comfortable in making the pasta, so I made a dough.
It's just not good enough.
It's not MasterChef.
Damn! Wow.
Enjoy your mini pizza.
All kidding aside, the ingredients I picked out were meaningful to me, important ingredients in every kitchen.
Do you know where the grana padano cheese comes from, what milk it's made out of? No, sir.
Do you know what a caper is? I know what they taste like, but I don't know what they are.
Do you know what balsamic vinegar is? It's the black salad dressing.
This is the difference between excelling in this competition and being sent home.
Why did you put sauce underneath it as well? I mean, if it had any chance of being a pizza, it'd be crispy.
I was just trying to get some color on the plate.
This is a waste of our time and your time in this kitchen.
It pissed Joe off, it pissed Gordon off.
But I thought it tasted good.
It'd definitely be a pizza I would order.
Next up, please, Leslie.
It's handmade ravioli.
The filling is grana padano, prosciutto, chanterelles, and artichoke.
Great technique on the pasta, the filling, the cooking of the artichoke.
Sauce is a little heavy, a little grainy.
But plating is the biggest thing we've got to work on.
Yes.
'cause as everyone gets better, that is something that can get you sent home.
Yes, thank you.
Big Willie, please.
It is a tomato soup with a fried egg with flat bread.
How would you rate that? - About an eight.
- An eight.
That's literally seven points too high.
Someone's going home tonight, and a tomato soup with a fried egg on top doesn't float my boat.
Next Christine, come on up.
Wow, that looks good.
What are you calling these? So it's a mushroom caramelle with a brown butter sage sauce with crispy prosciutto and crispy sage on top.
Great pasta, very thin.
Good filling.
Nice seasoning.
Good use of the brown butter.
Well, I expected a lot, and you delivered a lot.
This is really quite good.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Next up, Ahran, let's go, please.
Ahran, describe the dish, please.
It's a savory tiramisu With prosciutto olive oil ladyfingers And a mushroom prosciutto A savory tiramisu.
Yes, chef.
Have you been drinking, young lady? No, I don't even know how to open the bottle.
Didn't think it was gonna work when you put it together, hated the sound of the idea, tasting it It is absolutely delicious.
I love the ladyfingers.
I love the seasoning.
I see At 18 years of age, your knowledge of Italian cuisine ay be very limited, but your cooking ability is second to none.
There's very little I can fault in that.
- Thank you.
- Good job.
All right, Ahran.
Let's try.
Elizabeth.
Straight from New York City.
What do we have? - We have a breakfast lasagna - Love it.
made with grana padano, chanterelles, and prosciutto and a salad of baby artichoke hearts with capers marinated in champagne, lemon, and olive oil.
How many layers? There are five layers.
And what's inside of it? Layers of bechamel with prosciutto.
Then I mixed it the chanterelles and the prosciutto, and then I just did grana padano layered on top.
That's great.
This is amazing.
Thank you.
Great use of bechamel.
This is using the ingredients, reating other products from the base ingredients, putting them together in an amazing dish.
Have you been to Italy? No, I have not.
This is like taking a trip to Italy.
- Great job.
- Thank you.
Beautiful dish.
Joe is, like, gushing over my dish, and I'm like I think I had, like, a like, a deer in headlights, like, omg face going on, because I just can't believe that he likes my lasagna so much.
Elise, please.
Let's go.
Right, first of all, how are you feeling? I'm okay.
I'm just disappointed, because I feel like I failed today in both challenges, so Why'd you give up so easily when you can cook? I have just lost some confidence in the kitchen, and it's, uh It's very difficult to get it back.
You make one mistake, andyou disintegrate.
You're correct.
It's exactly what happens.
Tell me about the dish.
It's roasted mushroom and steamed artichoke ravioli with a red wine reduction tomato sauce.
So it's not a pie.
No, it's not a pie.
But it's a sad ravioli.
Oh, it's a sad ravioli.
Want a taste? Describe the taste of the tomato sauce.
It needs seasoning.
Yeah, and this is it You are a very smart, intelligent girl.
I just don't know how you can present a dish that's so bland.
It's a failure.
I understand.
Have you given up? No, I'm trying not to give up.
No, I don't think I've given up.
It just tastes like it.
I just don't know how you can present a dish that's so bland.
It's a failure.
I understand.
Have you given up? No, I'm trying not to give up.
No, I don't think I've given up.
It just tastes like it.
I didn't need to I didn't need to walk up there and have them taste that dish to know that it was bad.
What a night.
First off, Christian, please come down from the balcony and make your way to the station.
Thank you.
That was a really tough challenge, but there were two standout dishes tonight.
The first one absolutely went outside of the box.
This home cook is one of the toughest home cooks here.
She's also the youngest.
Ahran.
Congrats.
The other great dish showed that the home cook who put it together has incredible technique and knowledge.
Every single component was perfectly executed.
Tonight's winning dish belongs to Elizabeth.
Congratulations.
I continue to be amazed by my own success.
I'm just gonna revel in feeling great for a little bit.
Congratulations to Ahran and Elizabeth.
You will both be team captains in our upcoming challenge.
Congratulations to you both.
Normally, we would ask the three worst dishes to come down and stand in front of us.
Tonight there are two obviously bad dishes.
Can the two cooks that are responsible for those dishes please put your hand up? I'm asking for two.
The worst two.
Elise, you're correct.
Cutter, you're not.
Elise and Cutter, please make your way down.
Willie, yes, yours was pretty bad, but these two were in a league of their own.
Elise, tonight's ravioli was dreadful.
The judges have said several times it only takes one bad dish to send you home, and tonight, it's mine.
It's mine.
Cutter You've been in the bottom across five challenges.
I know.
Produced some good dishes, but it's not your cooking ability.
It's your stubbornness that's stopping you from taking it to the next stage.
Love the girl to death, but Elise is a baker that can't bake.
I think I'm better than her.
I mean, it's nothing against her as a person.
I just think in the kitchen, I'm a better I'm better than her.
The unlucky 13th individual in this competition, the one that will be leaving the MasterChef kitchen tonight, the one that we think we cannot work with any longer That person is Elise.
Your time is done in the MasterChef kitchen.
Say good night to Cutter.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.
Elise, my darling, go back home.
Convince yourself exactly what you need to do, but don't get in a tangle when you make a mistake.
Bounce back.
Trust me, I've made a thousand of them, more than everyone in this room put together.
You need to bounce back.
Great baker.
And every time, from now on in, I come across a pie, There's only one person I'm gonna be thinking about.
It's you.
- Okay? - Okay.
Come and say good-bye, darling.
Thank you all for the opportunity.
Oh, you're very welcome.
Have a nice trip back home.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, chef.
Thank you, darling.
Come here.
Oh, dear.
Even though I'm going home, I still love food, and I'm proud to have been part of the top 13.
Well done.
Congratulations.
Thank you, chefs.
Thank you.
This is a once-in-a-lifetime experience that I will remember forever.
You nailed it.
For me, one of the best dishes of the night.
Thank you so much, chef.
And I hope that it helps me get a chance to start a new career, something that can totally change my life, and for that, I'm incredibly thankful for the experience.
Next week the MasterChef restaurant opens its doors for a night of romance.
Love is in the air.
But there's no love lost in the kitchen.
It needs salt.
- I told him.
- What you mean, told him? Just help him do it.
Come on.
And the stakes are higher than ever before.
All the tables are now full Except one.
That table is reserved for my gorgeous wife, Tana.
Oh, my god.
Our dish better be perfect.
for a night of romance.
Love is in the air.
But there's no love lost in the kitchen.
It needs salt.
I told him.
What you mean, you told him? Just help him do it.
Come on.
And the pressure to impress is greater than ever.
All the tables are now full, except one.
That table is reserved for My gorgeous wife, Tana.
Oh, my god.
Our dish better be perfect.
Walking into the kitchen, I'm just thinking about how much I miss my husband and how much I miss cooking for him.
We just got married three months ago.
I know he supports me and will be so thrilled that I made it to the top 12.
Welcome, everyone.
Tonight, you will all compete in a team challenge, but you won't be going anywhere to cook the food for this challenge.
Tonight the diners will come to us.
We have a world-class restaurant behind us.
It's as beautiful as any dining room you'll find in America.
This evening, every table is sold out.
The theme of tonight's challenge is - Love.
- Aw.
The tables in our restaurant will be filled with 17 couples that are madly in love with each other.
I've been with my girlfriend Odile for almost four years, and she's the world to me.
Being able to cook for all of these happy couples, it feels like the closest thing I can have to seeing my girlfriend right now.
Tonight, romance is on the menu.
You 12 home cooks will be split into two teams of six.
Each team will be responsible for creating and cooking a stunning composed entree and an equally impressive dessert, both worthy of this very special occasion.
And then each couple will decide together which team delivered the best overall dining experience.
The team with the most votes will not have to face that dreaded upcoming pressure test.
Elizabeth and Ahran, because you had the two best dishes in the last elimination challenge, you will be team captains.
I'm not a fan of this challenge, because I've never been on a date before.
So the fact that I have to cook a romantic dinner, I'm not too excited.
Now, Elizabeth, because you had the best dish in the previous challenge, you get to pick first.
I'm choosing Francis.
Francis.
Well done.
Thank you.
I pick Francis first, because he's such a passionate person, and with the challenge being all about love, he's totally gonna rock this.
Okay, Ahran.
I'm choosing this person because he's an amazing cook, and he's also one of my best friends here.
Big Willie.
Big Willie.
Wow.
Elizabeth, second pick.
Frankly, if I were gonna eat a dessert, I'd want this person to make it, and that's why I'm choosing Jaimee.
Wow.
Jaimee.
Right, next pick.
Christine.
I choose Christine because she's a phenomenal cook.
She has a great personality, and she's amazing on team challenges.
I need someone that can rock a protein like nobody's business, so I want Victoria.
Wow, Victoria.
That's it, girl.
Christian.
- Christian, welcome to the red team.
- Thank you.
- Courtney.
- Wow.
Next pick.
After working with him last time, I noticed if he just has a direction, he does everything very well.
Leslie.
Wow.
What a turnaround.
Right, next pick.
I would really like to work for Elizabeth.
I haven't won a single team challenge.
I just need to win this one.
Daniel, please come join me.
Wow, Daniel.
Please give Cutter the apron.
Go and join your teams.
I'm not gonna say I'm not nervous that I'm going in there with Leslie.
But if we're gonna work together, let's put everything behind us, and let's focus on winning, because if we lose, we're in a pressure test.
In this next challenge, you can choose from the finest luxurious proteins: striped bass, filet mignon, rack of lamb, even lobster.
For your dessert, you have everything at your fingertips to help your dishes shine.
You will each have before you have to serve your entrees.
An hour after your entree goes out, you will have to send your incredible romantic desserts into the dining room.
Now, is everybody ready? Yes, chef.
Your 60 minutes starts Now.
Okay, so let's do the lobster.
For the side of the lobster, what about, like, a risotto? - Are you comfortable with that? - Yeah.
Take one.
I got one.
The idea is two hearts.
Everything on the plate is beautiful and red and gorgeous, so I want to use the filet.
Let's go, guys.
I'm feeling really good.
The menu that we planned is very romantic.
We're doing a lobster risotto topped with a butter-poached lobster.
And for the dessert, we're gonna make a raspberry milk chocolate tiramisu.
Tray of lobsters behind you, Leslie, coming up.
You've got it, man.
I have Leslie and Cutter working on the lobster Yeah, that's perfect.
Christine and Christian working on the risotto.
- Right here.
- Boom.
- Here, three more egg yolks.
- Three? And I'm working on dessert with Willie.
So I feel really good.
I think even though I'm the youngest one here, they all, like, respect me, and I respect them too, and I think it's gonna work out really well.
I have a team full of complete rock stars, every single person.
We are doing a medium-rare filet with a beet and potato puree.
And for our dessert, we're making a beautiful sponge cake with a salted caramel layer, a dark chocolate layer, a strawberry layer, and a nut layer.
Victoria is prepping steaks.
Whoo! Daniel is starting on the reduction.
Jaimee's heading up dessert.
And Courtney and Francis and I are just kind of general prep work.
I have not yet been on a losing team, and I don't think that that's gonna happen today.
Hey, wrong pot, wrong pot.
- Oh, wrong pot.
- Wrong pot.
That's all right.
I would've got it.
- Those look awesome, Victoria.
- Thank you.
So tonight, we're gonna have a room full of romance.
When you're taking your wife out for a romantic dinner to celebrate, you know, an anniversary, what do you do to create romance? First thing we do is leave the kids behind, check into a hotel, have the most amazing pink champagne.
And what's the dinner? Maybe oysters to start, roasted scallops, and then for our main course, a big treat for us would be - a phyllo beef Wellington to share.
- Nice.
I got it.
I got it.
Grated cheese.
- I got it.
- All right.
So the red team's doing lobster risotto, a dish we see very often.
Risotto can take you to great heights, or it can drag you to the bottom.
Here's the jeopardy: risotto, when it's ready, it's got to go.
It doesn't hold.
Lobster becomes rubbery.
You bring those two elements on the same plate, so if it's not perfect, you've completely lost every vote.
You need another bowl, or you're good? - I'm good.
- Okay.
Blue team, headed by Elizabeth, going with filet mignon.
- Smart.
- Love filet.
It is probably the most popular dish eaten on Valentine's day.
The jeopardy there, of course, it's unforgiving as a protein.
It doesn't hold well.
You can't refire it too long.
So where the red team's got jeopardy with the lobster, blue team's got jeopardy with the filet.
Throwing 'em in.
Yeah.
Speed up, guys, please.
Everybody, the MasterChef restaurant is open.
Our first vips are streaming into the restaurant.
Your food better be perfect.
We're celebrating our third-year anniversary.
Me and Shawna are celebrating our 15th year anniversary.
We've been married 65 years, and we're looking forward to a delicious meal.
When you start doing the sides Yeah.
Let the lip of pan help you out.
There you go.
How's the lobster? Almost done? - No, it's not done.
- I'm gonna taste it.
It needs salt.
Come on, yo, you guys got to start tasting your [bleep], man.
- I told him.
- What you mean, you told him? - Just help him do it.
- He said he had it.
No, you both got it.
It's not if he had it.
Christian, we got it.
We got it, Christian.
Red team, blue team.
Attention please.
All the tables in the MasterChef kitchen are now full, except one.
That table is reserved for the single most important person in the world.
Flying over 6,000 miles tonight just for this dinner Please welcome My gorgeous wife, Tana.
Aw.
All the tables in the MasterChef kitchen are now full, except one.
That table is reserved for the single most important person in the world.
Flying over 6,000 miles tonight just for this dinner Please welcome My gorgeous wife of 18 years, Tana.
Turns out it's his wife, who's stunning, by the way.
Way to go, Gordon Ramsay.
The guy does everything right.
She's walks in, and she's wearing kick-ass heels.
She's simply gorgeous.
Man, didn't I do well.
- Good to see you.
Welcome.
- Thank you.
Now, Tana has flown all the way from London especially to be here tonight, 'cause I promised her a great dinner.
In my book, there's only one thing worse than disappointing me, and that's disappointing my amazing wife.
You've all got just under ten minutes.
- Good luck.
- Good luck.
Let's go, you guys.
Whoo! Mrs.
Ramsay has flown all the way from London to have this meal that my team is preparing.
If we screw this up, I'm on a plane to New York, probably tomorrow.
Good evening, ladies, gentlemen.
Good evening.
Thank you.
How was the flight? - Very good, thank you.
- Excellent.
Good evening.
Nice to see you.
Wow.
Excited? Yeah.
So are we.
Happy anniversary.
Would you mind if I do something very important? I just want to kiss my wife.
You can follow suit, by the way.
Come on, then, who's next? Seven minutes left, guys.
Let's go.
Cutter, Cutter, Cutter, Cutter.
How long on the meat, Victoria? It's coming.
Do you want to do a test plate right now? Yeah, copy that.
Oh, too rare.
Holy mother of god.
It's, like, rare, inching on mooing.
Ugh, these are all rare.
What do you need, then? Oh, shoot, is your oven up? - 350.
- Yes, Daniel's is up.
- Crank it up.
- We really got to hurry.
Underneath you.
Our whole team is riding on these trays of filets that I'm starting to think are not gonna be cooked enough.
Thank you.
Two minutes to go, guys.
That food needs to be on the plate and start getting wiped and finished.
Guys, this is how I need the plates to look.
Give me the lobster.
Give me the lobster.
Let's go.
Let's go.
Put the lobster on a plate.
Let's go, guys.
Pull it together.
This is it.
Behind you.
You want to just put a whole filet? Just do the whole filet.
Blue team, 30 seconds.
Get it on the plate.
Finish it with the sauce.
I need one more piece of meat.
We got four more to go.
Let's do it.
Ten, nine, eight Two more, two more! - Seven, six - Two more! Five, - four - Right there, right there.
- Three, two, one.
- Ow.
Hands in the air.
Hands up.
Here come the servers.
Fingers crossed.
I think those steaks are a little under.
I'm sorry, man.
I see these steaks going out, and I know that these steaks could be incredibly rare Good to see you, babe.
And could go to mrs.
Ramsay, and I am horrified.
Next course, guys.
One hour until desserts go out, guys.
Clean up your spaces.
Clean up, switch out.
- Hi.
- Thank you.
For you, sir.
- Lovely.
- Enjoy.
What do you think for the red team's lobster risotto? Lobster looks beautiful, doesn't it? It does.
Beautiful.
The risotto doesn't actually taste of lobster.
I just think, for me, slightly too much onion.
Mm-hmm.
But the actual lobster's delicious, - really nice.
- And for the beef? Blue team's filet mignon with a golden beet mash, red wine sauce.
It does look nice.
Great sear on the beef.
Let's see how it's cooked.
I do like it pink in the middle, but that's incredibly rare for me.
That's rare, darling.
Do you want to eat the outside? Yeah.
I'm sorry.
The beet puree is delicious.
- Isn't it? - I don't think I've had that, - and that's really nice, as are the mushrooms.
- Yeah.
Good evening, folks.
- Hello.
- My name is Joe.
I heard it's your 65th wedding anniversary.
How was the meat? I could stand it a bit more done.
it was a little bit rare.
But it is good.
I liked it.
You liked it.
You like it that rare.
It's the best steak I've ever had.
The best steak you've ever had? The best steak I've ever had.
We don't agree on everything.
I'll check on desserts.
Leave that for, like, three more minutes.
Not a problem.
The key to this tiramisu is really making sure that the cake is kind of compressed together so that it's really smooth and creamy.
Things are going according to plan.
We're dicing up strawberries, cutting the cake circles, and making the pastry cream, but the clock is just ticking down, and I'm worried we're not gonna be able to do everything in time.
Guys, under 15 minutes until your incredible desserts hit the dining room.
We've got less than 15 minutes, y'all.
Get something on the plate, guys.
I'm looking at the clock, and I'm like, "Ahran, we got 17 plates to make.
explain to me what we need to do, so I can start something, so we can get these dishes out.
" Now, are you putting that on the white? Cutter, do not freak out.
I'm not freaking out.
I'm asking.
That on here.
As we're working on the tiramisu, we realize that the way we want to plate it in our minds is not the way we want to plate it on the real plate.
It needs to kind of come out.
I know what you mean.
This is this doesn't You got to build layers like a lasagna.
Look, they can see the layers.
Let's get a dish.
Come on, we got to quit arguing, y'all.
Let's go.
With only minutes to go before desserts are served in the MasterChef restaurant team challenge - Better? Okay.
- Perfect.
The blue team is getting their dish together Cutter, do not freak out.
I'm not freaking out.
I'm asking.
And the red team seems to be falling apart.
You got to build layers, like a lasagna.
Look, they can see the layers.
Let's get a dish.
Come on, we got to quit arguing, y'all.
Let's go.
Red team, blue team, I look forward to tasting your desserts.
Let's go.
Do we have more cakes? Behind you.
Hop in here.
Wow, it's getting tense in there.
Let's go, guys.
- Oh, my god.
- More chocolate on this one.
Right here, right? Let's go! I need quickly.
Focus, presentation, taste.
- We need pastry cream.
- Oh, that's beautiful.
- Put 'em on the plates.
- Ten, nine - On your right, on your right.
- Eight, seven - More chocolate.
- Six, five Which one? Right here? One more.
We need one more.
Three, two, one.
Stop.
Hands up.
Good job, everybody.
- Good job.
- High five.
Servers are coming in.
Our team's tiramisu looks very pretty and elegant.
So I'm feeling really confident on this one and happy about it.
Our dessert plates look amazing.
Beautiful layer of strawberries and a little whipped cream with the cocoa on top.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Enjoy.
Thank you.
- Red team's dessert.
- Yeah.
Visually, what do you think, darling? It's quite messy, isn't it? - It looks a little bit clumsy.
- Mm-hmm.
Maybe we'll be blown away with the taste.
It does feel light.
- Does it? - Mm.
Yeah.
The chocolate's delicious.
Chocolate's delicious.
- Do you taste the raspberry? - No.
Right, blue team.
Visually, what do you think? I think it looks pretty with the strawberries like that.
A bit too many strawberries for me.
I mean, it's quite a big clump on there.
This certainly has much more flavor to it.
Salted caramel at the bottom is delicious.
Chocolate mousse, and then the cake is wonderful.
- It doesn't need all that cream.
- Definitely not.
I think, as you can see, we're eating around the cream, which is always a bad sign.
Beautiful evening.
There seems to be a lot of romance in the air.
How long have you guys known each other? We've been together for three years.
Lot of anniversaries here.
- It's a very special night.
- Yeah.
What's your assessment of the evening? It's a very inspiring night, and I think that tonight is the best night to ask a very important question.
Jessida Will you marry me? Yeah.
Ladies and gentlemen, we have a proposal in the dining room, Wwich I think went positively.
Big round of applause.
I love you.
I love you.
Ladies and gentlemen, very shortly, our servers will come around and distribute the check holder to each table.
You will have to decide together on which team to vote for, the red team or the blue team.
The team that you prefer, please leave that color in the check holder.
Thank you so much for joining us in the MasterChef restaurant.
We look forward to hearing your opinions.
The red team's lobster was cooked perfectly.
The steak was amazing.
I think I like the tiramisu better.
I like that one better.
I preferred mine.
You preferred yours.
- But I like 'em both.
- No, that doesn't work.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you so much.
Thanks so much.
Ladies and gentlemen, please give a warm welcome for our incredible, talented home cooks.
This was a magical evening for everyone in the restaurant.
But for one of these two teams, the night will not be ending on such a high note.
One team will be facing the dreaded pressure test.
The team that had the most votes Almost a landslide.
With just over 75% of the votes Congratulations to The blue team, ladies and gentlemen.
I cannot believe that we won.
I just wish that my husband could see me now.
It's, like, the craziest moment of my life.
Amazing.
Well done, Elizabeth.
Well done, blue team.
Red team, unfortunately, the whole team will now face the dreaded pressure test.
I definitely feel like I let my team down, and I feel like, as a team captain, I should have done much better.
Please head back into the MasterChef kitchen and clean up the red kitchen and the blue.
Let's go.
I was a failure today, and it sucks.
Blue team, I'd like all of you to go and get a glass of champagne from the bar.
It's time for me to escort my stunning wife home.
Please.
Let's go.
After losing the MasterChef romantic dinner challenge, the red team awaits a pressure test, where at least one home cook will be sent home.
Oh, man.
Here we go, pressure test.
Black aprons.
I'm getting tired of wearing black, bro.
What you think went wrong? I didn't think anything went wrong.
I thought we were on the money.
I had to do what I had to do with the lobster.
You know, I did, you know, forget the herbs and stuff in the butter, but you know what, there were other people next to me that could've said something to me.
You know, I was busy killing, you know, what, 23, 24 lobsters, knife to the head.
It's a new day.
Survival of the fittest now.
I'm going into this pressure test feeling real confident, because I've been in three pressure tests already.
This makes number four.
This is not my first rodeo.
This is my first pressure test, and I'm scared.
I could be going home.
This is not good.
Right.
Let's get one thing right.
Last night, we asked you all to cook a stunning, romantic dinner.
Blue team, you had the restaurant's favorite dishes.
More than 3/4 of the votes, and that's why you six home cooks are all up on the gallery safe from elimination.
Seriously, well done.
Thank you, chef.
Unfortunately for the six of you standing here in front of us, the morning after is going to hurt.
Because tonight, you will all face the dreaded pressure test.
Wow.
Last night, you all served a romantic dinner, and what's the perfect thing to round off a night like that? A glorious, decadent box of beautiful chocolates.
Nine absolutely perfect, handcrafted gourmet chocolate truffles.
We're asking you for nine high-end chocolate truffles.
to get those truffles right, you're gonna need a lot of technique.
The chocolate has to be melted to the perfect consistency Smooth, not grainy, with just the right amount of sweetness.
And your filling has to be spot-on in flavor and texture.
Don't forget, these truffles have to be visual feasts for our eyes as well as our palates.
Anything less, and you could be leaving the MasterChef kitchen.
It's time to head to your stations.
These hands make steak and ribs and drink beer, you know what I mean? They don't make truffles.
In front of you, you all have the exact same ingredients to make basic truffles.
Chocolate, heavy cream, sugar, and butter.
You also have use of a pantry chock-full of ingredients that you can use to decorate your truffles.
You all have just one hour to make us a box of nine perfect chocolate truffles, and you must have at least three different types of truffles in your box.
Okay, is everyone ready? Yes, chef.
Your one hour starts Now.
Watch out.
Got some coffee here.
I think this is honestly the hardest one we've ever had.
So far.
Even for the most accomplished home cook, Chocolate is very, very challenging.
Chocolate truffles is very difficult.
It's chemistry.
It's precision.
It's not familiar ground even for the most accomplished home cook.
But it's about that ratio, that chocolate, that butter, and that cream.
You know, insufficient cream, they're too hard.
Insufficient butter, then it's just pure chocolate.
But more importantly, the coating.
Now, you can go down the easy route and dust it with cocoa powder.
You can temper chocolate, get that nice sheen on it, and dip them.
I'm gonna do a dark chocolate mint truffle and a milk chocolate and orange and coconut, and then I'm still working on my third one.
I have a couple options, but I don't know yet.
Definitely out of my element.
I'm making a sea salt chocolate truffle, a cinnamon coffee truffle, and a almond crunch truffle.
And 60 minutes to do all this? It's really crazy.
I'm making a dark chocolate truffle, kind of Japanese-inspired with togarashi and orange.
I've never made truffles before, so I'm just hoping that it all comes together.
What's going on, Christian? What is the plan? What are you doing? Well, my first truffle is gonna be an eggnog brandy truffle.
My next truffle is gonna be a chocolate-covered pretzel truffle, and last but not least, the chocolate bacon truffle.
So, Christian, you feel confident? I've never done truffles before, but we shall see.
- Don't burn the bacon.
- Yeah, watch that.
Yes, sir.
Use your imagination.
They need to look stunning.
Leslie, fourth time in a row in a pressure test.
Truffles, ever made them before? No, I usually go to Beverly Hills to get my truffles for my wife.
What are the actual three styles? I want to use the brandy in the dark, and then I was thinking of throwing a little cayenne pepper in the milk, because chocolate and heat is very sexy.
Okay.
You know, I'm throwing truffles in my wife's mouth, I want her to feel hot.
Rule number one, happy wife, happy life.
- Good luck with these truffles.
- Thank you.
Third pressure test, Cutter.
Yep.
You ever made truffles before? Of course not.
So what do you think? Is this a tough challenge? Yeah, not only is it tough, you know, dealing with chocolate, because it's so temperamental, but also being in a pressure test just adds to it.
Okay, who's going home? If I don't get this right, it's definitely me.
I mean, there's no if, ands, or buts about it, - so I'm not worried about it.
- I agree.
I mean, everyone's saying that you're going home, so that should be more incentive for you to prove them wrong.
- Yeah, exactly.
- Right? Dig in.
Ahran, what's the flavor? One of them is a dark chocolate peanut butter, one is a dark chocolate hazelnut, and one is a milk chocolate mocha.
Are you feeling confident tonight? I'm a little bit overwhelmed right now, chef - Overwhelmed? - But all my bases are almost done chilling.
- Mm-hmm, young lady.
- Yes, chef.
You can't let that one little defeat get you down.
Now, big deep breath, Composure, - stay on top of it.
- Yes, chef.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.
Who's vulnerable tonight? Oh, I think Ahran.
She's lost her confidence.
She's in a funk.
Never been in a pressure test.
So, I mean, talk about being at a disadvantage.
Cutter, also.
Every time Cutter has cooked a dessert, he's ended up right on the bottom.
I don't think today will be any exception.
Cutter for me is the one who's gonna come back strong.
- He's a goner.
Watch.
- No, he's not.
That can work.
That can work.
How's Leslie doing back there? He's doing good.
The more pressure tests that Leslie's in, - the better he performs.
- Yep.
He's becoming an animal of the pressure test.
It's not getting hot enough.
Eight minutes to go.
- Christine, what's the plan? - Yes.
It's looking a little inconsistent.
- What are you doing? - Yeah, I know.
I think you're a little behind, Christine.
I am a little behind.
You got to have them in here, gorgeous and ready to go in, like, eight minutes.
- I have more in the in the blast - Oh, you do? Let's get it done.
Let's go.
Okay, thank you.
Nine stunning truffles have got to be in the box.
Let's go, guys, one minute left, come on.
Finishing touches.
Make that box look beautiful.
They look great, Christine.
Oh, god, thank you.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one, stop.
Hands in the air.
Nine stunning truffles have got to be in the box.
Five, four, three, two, one, stop.
Hands in the air.
Right, all of you, very carefully, please, bring your boxes of chocolates down to the front.
I am not happy with my chocolates at all, so I'm a little bit scared.
I'm literally praying, "Oh, please be good enough that I don't get my ass chewed.
" It's time to taste your chocolates and find out who will be leaving the MasterChef kitchen tonight.
Cutter.
We'll be honest with each other, right? The last few weeks have not been going too well.
Before I open it, what's your assessment, would you say, one to ten, in all honesty? I'd say about a seven or eight, I hope.
Really? Here we go.
Wow.
Is that a good wow or a bad wow? Visually, these are a ten.
Wow, thank you.
Can you guys see that from up there? - Yeah.
- Yeah, they look great.
Who's surprised that Cutter made these? Tell me the flavors.
Okay, so I have mint-infused dark chocolate with a peppermint coating, and then I have two milk chocolate infused with orange liqueur.
One's got white chocolate shavings with orange zest.
And then I did a toasted coconut.
So what should I try first? I like truffles for after dinner, so I would go with the mint, to freshen my breath, so I can kiss the girls.
Just please be good on the inside.
It's like a christmas ornament.
Nice and fudgy.
It's perfectly balanced.
The peppermint candy on the outside is a great foil for that creaminess of the actual ganache.
I don't think you could have done it any better.
Good job.
Appreciate it.
Thank you.
So Is this like the new Cutter we're gonna see here going forward, or is this just a one-time deal? Even though y'all have been hard on me, I've tried to pay attention to what y'all say.
I'm hoping this is my rebound.
Rebounding in a box of chocolates.
Who would've ever thought, Cutter? Right? Great flavor.
The orange infusion's very sophisticated.
Tastes like something you'd get from a real chocolatier.
Good job.
Thank you.
Personally, I think Joe and Graham are full of crap.
I mean, they look like you.
- Clumsy.
- Yes, sir.
Just kidding, Cutter, they look great.
That was so mean.
You want me to die right here? Finally.
Man.
Mmm.
Delicious, great texture.
Smooth.
The only thing I want to do now is eat another one.
Thank you, chef.
This is an amateur competition, and you've just created a box of chocolates at a professional level.
- Thank you very much.
- Great job.
Good job, man.
So, Christian, let's see what we have.
This is an eggnog brandy truffle.
This right here is your bacon-covered truffle.
And this is your chocolate- covered pretzel truffle.
So which one should I try? The pretzel, I would lover you.
- This one here? - Yes.
Ganache is nice.
It's a good flavor.
I love pretzels.
What I would've done, a larger chop on 'em - Yes.
- Just on the outside.
- Thank you.
- Thanks.
- Big Willie.
- Yes, chef.
A master in desserts, so I'm expecting a box of fireworks.
Wow.
Uh-huh.
You have a dark chocolate with togarashi seasoning topped with flake salt, and then the other one, you have a milk chocolate with habanero peppers with sprinkles and coconut.
Can I borrow those glasses? Sure.
Let's get one thing right.
What is that? I love color, chef.
You love color, or you're color-blind? Willie, seriously, why so heavy-handed? That's what I'm getting at.
You know, you spoil the texture.
- With the sprinkles.
- Yeah.
The ganache, love that heat.
Love that.
What a shame.
One of the best flavor combinations of the evening, however, the dress that you wrapped it up in, wrong fit.
Okay, Ahran, tell me, what did you make for us? I did a milk chocolate hazelnut truffle, a dark chocolate peanut butter pretzel truffle, and a coffee mocha truffle.
Which one is this one? That's the hazelnut truffle.
- Hazelnut.
- Yeah.
Did you use the same ganache for all of them? No, I used different bases.
that one is the milk chocolate one.
- It's very rich.
- Yeah.
I guess truffles are supposed to be rich.
It's not bad, a little dense, could be lighter.
Leave it at that.
- Leslie.
- Yes.
Right.
Leslie's romantic box of chocolates.
- Wow.
- Yes.
Wow, wow, wow, wow, wow.
Leslie's romantic box of chocolates.
Wow.
Yes.
Wow, wow, wow, wow, wow.
Deribe your box of chocolates, please.
There's three different types of chocolate.
There's a dark chocolate and a coconut milk chocolate and then white chocolate.
These things were supposed to be romantic.
Yours look like they've been molded from your armpits.
Guilty as charged.
I messed up.
That's the white chocolate.
I put white ginger powder in 'em and some coffee just to enhance the flavor.
The white chocolate, I like that.
But it's that shell on the outside.
- Yes.
- A little bit too thick, A little bit too crunchy.
It's a box of chocolates you need to eat in the dark, yeah? Yes.
Sorry.
It's got a great flavor on the inside.
Totally do not like the raw coconut.
But the thing is, they look really bad.
Okay, Christine.
What are the flavors? A sea salt dark chocolate truffle, coffee and cinnamon chocolate truffle, and a almond crunch truffle.
Why didn't you make them round? You were so close, but you stopped short of that.
They could be rounder.
You're right.
Super bitter.
Okay.
Really bitter.
Try it.
It's a little bitter.
- Disappointing.
- Sorry.
Christine, this one is? That's the coffee cinnamon.
What's that on the outside? Almond dust and cocoa nibs.
What, like, raw cocoa nibs? Yes.
Truffles should delight me.
Cocoa nibs are really bitter.
You have to use them with extreme caution.
What a shame.
That was clearly a very challenging pressure test.
Excuse us, because we've got some big decisions to make.
Great job.
Good job, bro.
First off, Cutter's were exceptional.
Amazing you see, miracles happen, even here in the MasterChef kitchen.
Ahran's were kind of a sluggish start.
Not perfect, but they weren't bad.
And Willie's all the flavors were good.
- The aesthetics were lacking.
- Yeah.
Christian's were a little dry.
Christine was missing the whole boat.
I don't think she tasted them.
They were just bitter.
But look at Leslie's.
Those things were the ugliest things that we've seen.
Okay, Cutter, step forward.
So I've made no secret of the fact that I've doubted your ability to create quality food.
But when I am wrong, I will admit it.
And tonight, you proved me wrong.
Thank you, sir.
Take your box of chocolates, go up to the balcony, and have your fellow contestants have a taste of success.
Yes, sir.
Please head to the balcony.
Good job.
The shock of the season.
Yeah, let's see 'em.
Look at that right there.
Look at that.
Obviously, Cutter was way above the rest of the class tonight.
Can the following three people please step forward? Big Willie Ahran and Christian.
These chocolate truffles tripped you all up in various ways.
Luckily tonight, two people fell much harder than you did.
You are all safe.
Please head to the balcony.
I am really relieved to be sent upstairs, because, honestly, today was a disaster.
It's like a nightmare just ended.
Christine and Leslie, two completely different boxes of chocolate.
One looks pretty decent but tastes inadequate.
One looks a mess but tastes pretty decent.
The person leaving the MasterChef kitchen tonight that person is Christine.
We are as shocked as you are.
Leslie, say good-bye to Christine and head up to the balcony, please.
Sorry.
Christine, we found the chocolates to be bitter beyond belief.
The ratios were unbalanced, and the contrast didn't work.
Come and say good-bye, darling, please.
Bye.
Thank you.
Thank you so much.
- Thank you.
- Bye.
Best of luck.
I'm sorry I let you down.
Man, man, man, man.
Take a look up there, the top 11.
Who do you think is gonna win MasterChef? My girl Ahran.
Ahran.
- Keep your head up high, please.
- Thank you.
- Great job, Christine.
- Good night, darling.
I love you, Christine.
There are no words to describe how disappointed and frustrated I am with myself.
Christine.
I still can't believe that I was cooking in the presence of culinary excellence.
- Congratulations.
Well done.
- Thank you, chef.
I'm just honored to have been here.
I expected a lot, and you delivered a lot.
Thank you.
And I look forward to using the knowledge and the momentum I've gained here Give it up, girl! And entering into the culinary world.
Next week on MasterChef Tonight's challenge is all about choice.
We double down on a mystery box challenge, and the home cooks light up the kitchen.
You're kind of firing on all cylinders here.
It's a great dish.
It's perfect.
This could be in any restaurant.
For me, the best dish that you've cooked so far in this competition.
Only 11 remain.
Who will make this season's top ten? Somebody's going home tonight.
Make sure it's not you.
Oh, I'm definitely making the top ten.
Weeks ago, America's best 22 home cooks began a journey It's time for the world's biggest cooking competition to truly begin.
They've faced epic challenges I need that on that table right now.
confronted incredible pressure I wasn't liked from day one.
I'm not gonna stand here and be abused.
Now, just 11 home cooks remain.
Tonight, they battle it out for a spot in the coveted top ten It's perfect.
This could be in any restaurant.
and the right to be called MasterChef.
Somebody's going home tonight.
Make sure it's not you.
Oh, I'm definitely making the top ten.
Walking into the MasterChef kitchen today, I'm super pumped to tackle the mystery box.
The top ten is so close that I can almost taste it, and I'm going for the win.
Please head to your stations.
Thank you.
It is so amazing being top 11, but today, I want to be in the top ten, and the only way I can do that is, stay true to my style of cooking.
Welcome back, everyone.
There are 11 of you left in this competition.
You're almost almost in the top ten.
Now, we know we throw a lot at you, always keeping you guessing.
And trust me, tonight is no different.
It's time for another mystery box challenge.
You can probably guess by the two mystery boxes resting in front of you that tonight's challenge is all about choice.
Now, on the count of three, I want everyone to lift the box on their right first.
One, two, three, lift.
There you have a bunch of everyday ingredients that can be found right now in homes across this country.
Ground beef, bacon, ham steak, tilapia, iceberg lettuce, dill pickles, and processed cheese dip.
Okay.
Now it's time to lift up the mystery box on your left.
One, two, three, lift.
Oh, wow, okay.
These are all the things that I would buy at the grocery store but I can't afford, so this is exciting.
There you have the elevated, luxury version of the ingredients in the first box.
You have kobe beef, a berkshire pork chop, ahi tuna steak, stilton, caviar, fresh peas, and beautiful black truffles.
Wow.
It's quite an array.
That´s right.
It is a tale of two boxes.
And the good news is that you get to decide which box you want to cook with.
As far as we are concerned, there isn't a right or wrong box.
We'll be judging you purely on the execution of your dish.
Looking at the luxury box.
I mean, it kind of seems like a trap in the sense that if you mess one of these items up, that's gonna sink you.
When your 60 minutes start, please put the box back over the ingredients you will not be cooking with tonight.
- Got it? - Yes, chef.
Okay, lift your boxes.
Your 60 minutes starts Now.
I'm shooting straight for the fancy box.
I've been poor, and I've been well-off.
I like well-off a hell of a lot better than poor.
I feel like less people in the kitchen are going to embrace the cheap box.
It seems like more of a challenge.
I'm gonna take it and make something that nobody else in this kitchen is making.
I guarantee it.
I choose the expensive box, because to have been given such amazing ingredients and then to not use them seems kind of disrespectful to how great those ingredients are.
I picked the everyday ingredients.
This is the wiser box to pick, because if you knock it out of the park, it's really gonna show something.
If I can elevate these, that definitely feels like a winner to me.
First time ever, ever, they have the choice between two mystery boxes.
Do you want to show off and do something stunning with the everyday box, Or do you want to come out your comfort zone with luxury, high-end ingredients? Some devils in the boxes there.
Kobe beef, I mean, do they really understand how to cook kobe beef properly? That stuff dries out in seconds.
In the everyday box, what do you take to take a tilapia, a fish that costs less than $1 a pound, And elevate it into a dish? You could do, like, a peanut-crusted tilapia with some soy, or you could do, like, a stroganoff.
That's one of my favorite all-time dishes.
Right, Courtney, which box did you pick? - The fancy box.
- The fancy box.
Good, what's the dish? So I'm gonna do a pan-seared pork chop with some fragrant rice, and we're gonna do a truffle and parsnip puree.
- So you love luxury, right? - I do.
Taste everything.
Have a taste of that kobe beef.
I'm going to.
Victoria, what do you got going? - Everyday box? - Everyday box.
I think you're the right person for the everyday box.
That's flattering.
Thank you, Joe.
So what are you gonna make? I'm making tilapia with a little pork, iceberg salad with a dill pickle and bacon vinaigrette.
That dish almost sounds good.
I'm almost excited to give it to you.
I'm a little nervous.
Come on, guys.
Elizabeth, the luxury box.
What are you doing? I am doing seared berkshire pork chop with rosemary, - herb biscuits.
- Wow.
And a mustard cream sauce and a little pea salad.
I'm doing it all.
The everyday ingredients, you just weren't interested? If you have the best, why would you say no to the best? Top ten just around the corner.
Who don't you see in the top ten? Oh, I don't know.
Maybe Leslie.
All right, Leslie.
Fancy pants.
Did you even consider the everyday box? No, what? Are you kidding me? So what are you making? I'm just making kobe beef, pork chop, and the ahi tuna, a trio of proteins, and I got a pea puree.
- Did you taste this? - Yes, I'm working on it.
It needs everything, including love.
What's there? Parsnips with truffle.
Are the truffles in there already? Yeah.
Now you're talking my language.
Pureed truffles.
The problem with your food is, you have not seasoned anything.
You guys cannot even decide what truffle flavor tastes like unless you put salt in it.
I did put salt in it.
You did not put any salt in there.
There's no salt in there.
- I'm not - It's not seasoned.
All right, Leslie.
Fancy pants.
Did you even consider the everyday box? No, what? Are you kidding me? Are the truffles in there already? - Oh, yeah.
- Now you're talking my language.
Pureed truffles.
You have not seasoned anything.
You guys cannot even decide what truffle flavor tastes like unless you put salt in it.
I did put salt in there.
There's not salt in here.
Listen, it's not seasoned.
I put a little at a time.
What happens if I put too much salt in and then it's too salty? - Good luck.
- I'm trying.
Francis, how are you feeling? I'm good.
Confident, chef.
Luxury ingredients.
Now, what are you doing? I'm making a filet and tuna chessboard.
What's the chessboard consisting of? It's gonna be pieces of seared tuna.
Okay, right, so they're the black squares.
And the white squares? I'm gonna make little squares out of them, of the kobe.
So it's a surf and turf.
Yes, chef.
It sounds confusing, but then, it's Francis.
- So good luck.
- Thank you, chef.
For me, traditional is a little boring.
I want to be the face and the voice of gastronomy.
I'm happy to show the judges that such a basic, well-known dish around the world can be made into something totally different.
Just under Speed up.
There are some exciting, creative dishes out there.
Victoria's everyday box sounds really interesting.
Yeah, she's got a really spiced tilapia filet.
Elizabeth's, that sounds incredible.
Beef and pan-roasted pork chop served with this really nice puree.
Francis is doing a beef and tuna chessboard.
Yet again, he's thinking aesthetics.
- Raw? - No, he's gonna blowtorch it for us.
Interesting.
Last 2 minutes.
Finishing touches.
We want to see some stunning dishes, guys.
Start putting that chessboard together, Francis.
It's coming, chef.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one and stop.
Hands in the air.
Give yourselves a round of applause.
Well done.
That's a tough one.
After observing and tasting throughout the challenge, the judges now take one final look to identify three standout dishes.
The winner of this challenge will receive a major advantage in the next round.
The three best dishes of the night that we are dying to take a much closer look at The first dish, they did use the high-end box to perfection.
Seasoning, absolutely spot-on.
Please step forward Elizabeth.
I chose these very high-end ingredients.
It's not stuff that I necessarily cook with, but going with risky proteins it's what you have to do to get people's attention.
And I'm terrified.
It's terrifying.
Describe the dish, please.
It's a pan-roasted berkshire pork chop sliced over herb biscuits with parsnip, rosemary, oven fries, and a fresh pea salad.
The sear on the pork is beautiful.
Explain the sauce.
It is just a grain mustard cream sauce.
Butter, cream, mustard, and salt and pepper.
It's sophisticated, seasoned beautifully.
Biscuits are delicious.
You've gone for the high-end ingredients.
You've done them justice.
Right now, a serious contender.
Really pleased.
Absolutely delicious.
Great job.
Thank you.
So when you're taking a look at this The cook on the pork, it's cooked through, but it's not dry and crumbly.
You know, others should start looking at you for inspiration.
Couldn't be better seasoned.
Thank you.
Everything on here serves a purpose.
It's delicious, plated elegantly.
It is probably the best dish that you've made so far.
- Great job.
- Thank you.
You baked.
You pan-roasted.
You oven-roasted.
You seasoned.
You're kind of firing on a cylinders here.
- It's a great dish.
- Thank you.
One to watch, Elizabeth.
- Good job.
- Thank you.
The next dish that we want to examine further This home cook took the everyday ingredients and turned them into a restaurant-quality plate.
Please step forward, Victoria.
Nice.
Wow.
This is legitimately me on a plate.
Everyday ingredients is the kind of stuff that I've got in my refrigerator at home.
I feel that I elevated it, And I'm really excited to see what the judges have to say about it.
So tell me exactly what we have.
There's a ham steak, a little cheese sauce, and the filet of tilapia on top, bacon vinaigrette over the iceberg, and some potato crisps.
So we've got our tilapia.
The bacon is underneath it here? No, that's actually a piece of the ham steak that I've crisped up and put a little bit of the nacho cheese sauce Nacho cheese sauce in a MasterChef dish.
The rich saltiness that comes from the ham balances with the seasoning, but the best flavor that I'm getting, actually, is the pickles from the vinaigrette.
Simple dish.
Elevated everyday ingredients.
You made it hip.
Really good job.
I mean, have you won a mystery box yet? I have not won a mystery box yet.
- Maybe this is the night.
- Thank you, chef.
The one thing you need to know of tilapia It literally eats garbage, so you have to very, very aggressively season it, which is exactly what you did.
The tilapia's actually cooked well.
- Thank you.
- These chipscare good.
You went through a process.
You really thought about a strategy, picked a box, and then nailed it.
Thank you very much.
- Good job.
- Thanks.
Okay, the third dish we want to look at This home cook opted for the luxury box, and in this case, the risk paid off.
Please step forward, Leslie.
Boom, my name's called.
I'm walking up.
And I don't want to pat myself on the back just yet, but I just might have this here.
Describe the dish, please.
We've got a trio of protein here, the pork chop, the kobe beef, and you have the ahi tuna.
They've all been seared on a griddle.
You're the only person out of everybody tonight that had the balls to say, "I'm gonna go for all three.
" Right, describe the tuna.
It's just marinated in a little soy sauce with a touch of balsamic vinegar and some salt.
Slightly warm in the center.
Perfect.
Kobe beef? Kobe beef.
Just salt and pepper and then the stilton cheese and the caviar just to make it look rich.
And the pork was just salt and pepper and just seared.
Here's the thing.
You're not a fluke.
Let's get that right.
Brilliant dish.
For me, the best dish that you've cooked so far in this competition.
I'm just so glad it's tonight, because you've picked the perfect moment.
Thank you.
Tell me about the pea puree.
It just has some salt, pepper, some of the cheese.
It's good.
You can taste the freshness, the greenness of the peas.
The kobe, love the idea of putting stilton on it.
It's a classic, but it's a classic 'cause it's delicious.
And where you put the truffles where? In the parsnip puree.
Oh, it's delicious.
I was angry when I was at your bench because I tasted some good food that had not been seasoned at all, but this is seasoned perfectly.
So good job.
Just leave it at that.
Don't answer.
Great dish.
Thank you, chef.
Well done.
Elizabeth, Victoria, Leslie, three amazing dishes.
Only one dish can win tonight, and that person will then go on to receive a huge advantage.
I want that advantage.
I'll be one stop closer to writing the cook book that I've been dreaming of for years.
At this stage of the game, it literally is game-changing.
This isn't just some fun, get-up advantage, win a mystery box, man.
I want this victory badly.
I want that $1/4 million.
The best dish that we thought was the most creative This is an opportunity of a lifetime.
Forget the money.
Forget the book.
I want that fabulous MasterChef trophy.
Congratulations Three amazing dishes.
Only one can win tonight.
And that person will then go on to receive a huge advantage.
Congratulations Leslie.
Wow, finally.
Finally I'm a winner.
Are you ready to receive your game-changing advantage? Yes, I am ready to go into the pantry.
Let's go.
Thinking that the entire competition is now in his hands is a terrifying thought.
I really wanted to win.
For tonight's elimination challenge, you will have to choose between three types of a certain kind of food, something I'm very familiar with, something that I grew up eating, stuffed pasta.
Now, the first filled pasa is like me, refined, cultured.
It's a classic.
Tortellini.
Tortellini? Okay.
The ratio of filling to the pasta has to be exactly right.
Each one has its own perfect construction.
This is a very, very sophisticated filled pasta.
Your next choice is once again a filled pasta.
Like me, this filled pasta is inventive, hardy, fun.
It almost looks like candy.
Caramelle.
I've never heard of caramelle pasta.
They look like little bonbons, almost like the wrappers, twisted on the outsides.
Here are they filled with mozzarella, Finished with a simple, simple tomato sauce.
Okay.
Finally, my own personal favorite, Leslie.
A bit like me, rough around the edges.
These ones you're gonna love.
Raviolacci.
The pasta is so thin.
Almost like these light, fluffy, elegant pillows.
Filling needs to be absolutely perfect.
One small thing out of place and this stuffed pasta can become a disaster.
Leslie, you now get to choose which one of these three filled pastas everybody out there will have to cook tonight.
What's it going to be? I choose Straight up stairs, please, Leslie.
Enjoy that walk.
What a happy chap.
As you can probably guess, Leslie does not have to cook in tonight's difficult challenge and now has the honor, this year, to be the first home cook to be in the top ten of this competition.
Give a round of applause, please.
Good job, Leslie.
Leslie.
For his second advantage, Leslie got to choose from three different types of my favorite food: stuffed pasta.
We're looking for a homemade, fresh pasta good enough to be served at any one of my restaurants.
Tonight, Leslie chose The beautiful caramelle stuffed with mozzarella.
I don't know what caramelle pasta is.
We don't have fancy Italian restaurants, at least not where I've been.
You ten home cooks will have one hour to make us the most perfect, beautiful fresh caramelle in a delightful tomato sauce.
Trust me, the most difficult one to pull off tonight.
He did it for a reason.
Anybody nervous? Yes, chef.
So you should be.
Your five minutes in the pantry starts Now.
Let's go.
Come on, Jaimee Vitolo.
Lift those tattoos up.
Tomatoes, tomatoes, tomatoes.
When I get in the pantry, I'm looking at the dish.
I pick it up and see how it's folded and see how it's twisted.
Man, I just know it's supposed to look like a candy, I think.
So I'm kind of nervous, a little bit.
I don't hardly ever cook any Italian food at home.
Anybody seen gorgonzola? - Just in case.
- Funny.
As usual, I see all the ingredients, And I'm like, "bugger it.
" Forget the traditional pasta.
I need to shine in this challenge.
I'm gonna dye my pasta with beets And make it like bubblegum.
Go bold, you know? Go big.
Okay, guys, let's go.
Look, Francis has got real food in his basket.
Guys, don't unpack yet.
Is everybody familiar with the pasta machine in front of you with the hand crank? Yes, chef.
Leslie is going to receive another advantage.
Come on down here and stand next to me, please.
I feel like it's Christmas, and I'm getting more presents.
Leslie, in my hands, I have a good, old-fashioned rolling pin, And you, my friend, are going to give this to one of your fellow, beloved competitors.
You will also take away that home cook's pasta machine.
Whoever you give that rolling pin to, you're taking them back old-school.
It's probably moving their foot one step out that door.
This is an opportunity of a lifetime to really focus on one individual and hopefully send them home.
The kitchen is yours.
I want you just to touch it.
Oh, really? Leslie is walking around like a silver fox in a hen house - Really? - Uh, no.
Teasing people.
- You know I love you.
- Yeah, leslie! That's what I'm talking about.
He just looks like he has waited his entire life to have this advantage, and he's having the best time.
Hugging it out.
He's got that grin on his face, and like everything Leslie does and says, I'm just thinking, "Get it over with.
" I am feeling so happy right now.
Just the look on his face was worth $1 million.
- Daniel.
- Yes, chef.
I'm sorry, young man, but you have been singled out by Leslie.
That's gonna be very difficult.
I mean, are you surprised that leslie singled you out here? No, chef, because Leslie is a petty man that bears grudges, and this is precisely the type of behavior I expect from him.
It's about to get real.
Hell yeah.
You have one hour to make us perfect homemade caramelle, And at least one person is gonna be going home.
Is everyone ready? Yes, chef.
Your hours starts Now.
We knew that this caramelle pasta is something that they're not familiar with.
Now times that by 100, how difficult is that to have toakwith a rolling pin? You either know how to do it, or you don't.
If you've never rolled pasta with a pin, it's gonna be very difficult.
So simply, you have to sheet out a perfect layer of thin pasta, cut out basically squares.
You put in your filling, and then you roll 'em like a candy.
Now, the most tricky thing abouthis contest is managing the water content of the mozzarella.
If there's too much water in the mozzarella, in the filling, it will burst the caramelle.
Very technical.
I gave a rolling pin to Daniel because Daniel has been nothing but nasty to me from day one.
My goal, hopefully, is to send him home, and I don't have to look at him anymore.
So let me tell you something.
First thing I was ever really into was baseball.
I love the babe, so I'm swinging.
I'm swinging.
I'm calling it.
This one's going out of the park.
It's going right towards that [bleep] right there.
I gave a rolling pin to Daniel because Daniel has been nothing but nasty to me from day one.
The first thing I was ever really into was baseball.
I love the babe, so I'm swinging.
I'm swinging.
I'm calling it.
This one's going out of the park and it's going right towards that [bleep] right there.
Wow, that is intense.
See, that's why it shows you just how important it is to win these advantages.
I like when he gets frazzled.
Just under 45 minutes to go.
I'm third-generation Italian, so making pasta is nothing new to me.
I'm gonna steam my tomatoes, salt my mozzarella, And I'm squeezing all of the moisture out of it.
I'm gonna keep it classy and traditional, just like me.
Right, Francis.
How are you doing? - Good, chef.
- What's that? This is a beet-colored pasta, just to give it that caramel-looking color.
- Raw beet root juice.
- Yes, chef.
You're just doing this for the eye again, just the color.
I think candy, and I think bubblegum, et cetera, you know? Are you always this adventurous? I mean, do you ever think about playing safe and just getting through? This is playing safe.
You're nuts.
You know that, right? Thank you, chef.
I take that as a compliment.
You are absolutely nuts.
- Good luck.
- Thank you, chef.
Big Willie, tell me what we got.
I'm doing a dessert caramelle.
- No.
- Yes.
I got a squash and apple filling.
And then I'm gonna make a creme anglaise.
Doing that with creme anglaise, like, in a dessert fashion, that's just crazy town.
You know, go big or go home.
But, I mean, you don't want to go home, though, right? I don't want to go home.
You know that we're judging you on the caramelle based on, like, what we showed you.
But, you know, I have to shine.
Well, at least you can live with that then.
Geez, time flies when you're having fun in the MasterChef kitchen, huh? I'm gonna be doing a mascarpone, asiago, vodka cream sauce.
You know, I'm excited.
I really am.
Daniel, you know what they call this in Italian? - No, sir.
- A mattarello.
Why you? What happened? I totally expected this kind of thing from him.
I mean, you can see, as he's lording over me right now, that he has an ax to grind.
You think that Leslie knows that you struggle with time? Absolutely.
He knows.
What are you making? I'm doing a short rib with kimchi and watercress.
I added a little wine reduction to the pasta dough to give it a little color.
I'm a little bit worried about the wine reduction, but aside from that, I think you're in pretty good shape.
All right, miss Vitolo, how are you feeling? Good, I have my first one in here.
- Wow, that looks beautiful.
- Thank you.
What's inside? I'm keeping it classic with some mozzarella balls.
Oh, good, everyone's going crazy with meats and beet-root pasta.
Well, I put a little bit of ground pork in my sauce.
It's definitely inspired by the sauce my dad makes at home.
Kind of channeling my dad right now.
You confident you can get yourself in the top ten? - Yes, I am.
- Okay.
Just under 10 minutes to go.
Awesome.
Thank you.
Interesting stuff going on out there.
The highlight, right now, Jaimee Vitolo.
Sticking with tradition, and they are absolutely incredible.
Courtney looks good as well.
Francis's taste dreadful.
What is he doing over there? Raw beet root juice in a pasta.
Why are these people taking such risks to get into the final ten? I just don't understand.
Come on, finishing touches.
Let's go, guys.
Make it look good.
Tidy up those plates, please.
Somebody is going home tonight.
Make sure it's not you.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one, and stop.
Hands in the air.
Wow.
Seriously well done.
Tough challenge.
All right, everybody, first up, This home cook was at a big disadvantage, had the pasta machine taken away.
Please step forward, Daniel.
My instant reaction when I'm looking at my completed dish is, "Hell yeah, I did it.
" Even if I had had the rolling machine, I can't honestly say that my dish would've been different.
What do we have in front of us here? This is a red wine caramelle filled with short rib.
It's on a tamarind habanero curry.
It's topped with roasted tomatoes, peppers, and roasted nori.
As far as the technique, the pasta looks like it's rolled fine.
A little less appealing color-wise.
Somehow you infused the pasta with the red wine? Yes, chef, as I'm kneading the dough, I reduced one cup of wine.
The color's certainly what I wanted to go for.
It is what you wanted.
That's what you wanted.
- Yes, chef.
- Okay.
You know, the flavor combination The heat, the acidity, the salinity, it just doesn't make a lot of sense, and it's so out of line with what we showed and what we were asking.
Why go so far off? This is a chance to reach the top ten.
And why give you something that you've had the best of in the world? 'cause that's what I asked for.
This looks more like a steamed dumpling in a chinese restaurant.
Noted.
There's the habenero.
Ooh, it's hot.
You think that could ever be served in an Italian restaurant? Not in an Italian restaurant.
I mean, the pasta itself is too thick.
It's gummy.
You would never put red wine into pasta.
The biggest challenge here was not the lack of the pasta machine that Leslie took away.
I think the biggest challenge was yourself.
Look at the size of them.
I got more pasta than filling.
I just want to share the experience.
Yes, sir.
Too spicy.
A contrast that doesn't work.
But I'd like to congratulate you on standing out tonight, possibly outside the door.
Whoo! What do you think? I wish I had made the caramelle smaller.
- I enjoy the sauce.
- Yeah, stop there.
- Good night.
- Thank you, chef.
I'm not a vengeful person, but my fingers are crossed and going, "Okay, this is my redemption here, man.
Daniel's going home.
" Disgusting.
But I'd like to congratulate you on standing out tonight, possibly outside the door.
- Good night.
- Thank you, chef.
Oh, dude! What am I doing? Why am I making this crazy japanese curry pasta? I got to rein it in.
Disgusting.
Jaimee.
So tell me about the sauce.
It's a creamy tomato sauce.
there's fresh oregano, fresh thyme, ground pork Is it like a family recipe, that sauce? It's definitely a take on my dad's.
- What's your dad's name? - Michael.
What does Michael Vitolo do for a living? He works for the department of sanitation.
That's a tough job.
He makes a killer meat sauce.
These are really great.
This is a perfect interpretation of taking the spirit of what we asked for, making it your own.
You added the sausage to the sauce and made it a little bit richer.
Mozzarella's clean, milky, dry.
What do you think Michael Vitolo would be saying if he was standing here and we gave him one of these caramelletis? I think he'd be really proud.
Does he know how good of a cook you are? Yeah, I cook for him all the time.
This is a dish that not only michael vitolo would be happy, I would be happy to also serve it in my restaurant.
Thank you very much, Jaimee, because you really brought me a taste of Queens.
Yay.
Thank you.
Next up, please, Scottish Francis.
What's the dish? I made caramelle pasta with beet juice, with short rib and mozzarella.
The idea of beet juice in a pasta That's solely for the look.
You wanted the color because that made you think of candy? Yes, chef.
What's going on with the sauce? It is a yellow cauliflower and yellow bell pepper puree, and also I was just trying to create some summer and some vibrancy.
That doesn't go together.
I thought it did.
I was wrong.
And there's no seasoning.
That right there,it tastes like fatty, shredded beef.
You know, when you have this as a sauce on top of that and then it's encased in beet root pasta, it's just not good.
I support people that like to think out of the box and be creative, but it has to taste good, and it just doesn't.
I understand, chef.
Thank you.
Making top ten is one of the most important things for any contestant on MasterChef.
Should've kept it simple.
I overcomplicated it.
Next up, Cutter.
Describe the dish.
It's a short rib stuffed caramelle with a vodka white sauce and topped with roasted garlic.
They look like they've got a right amount of filling.
The filling's delicious.
Love the heat at the end.
We got excited that someone finally did a cream sauce.
You know what, Cutter? You may have a face like a british bulldog chewing a wasp, but you do cook like an angel.
- Don't forget that.
- Appreciate it.
Good dish.
Thank you.
Next up, Courtney.
Very courageous.
You just used fresh tomatoes? It's a mozzarella-filled caramelle with fresh tomatoes, garlic, and some yellow onion.
Did you do anything to season the mozzarella inside? I salted it and then tried to coax that moisture out of it.
This is very dry, very firm.
Good balance between the sauce and the pasta itself.
The plate is beautifully presented.
In its own simple Italian way, it's a super sexy, simple dish.
Thank you, sir.
Last up, big Willie.
Right.
Describe your dish.
It's a squash-apple caramelle with a creme anglais sauce.
Joe said caramelle, the kind of thing that he loves eating daily, something I want to see in one of my restaurants, and so why a dessert? It just it just came to me.
I justI get so upset, because it's almost like an abuse.
Francis here with the tricks, Daniel's confused, and you're just all over the shop.
But I am so unimpressed.
I see this dish, and I'm absolutely dreading tasting it, because it sounds disgusting.
It looks like regurgitated dog vomit.
It's just unappetizing.
Excuse me.
Why a dessert? It just came to me.
It sounds disgusting.
It looks like regurgitated dog vomit.
It's just unappetizing.
Excuse me.
The custard is way too sweet.
It's just obliterated with cinnamon.
I love you when you cook humble, but I absolutely detest when you've been given the best of ingredients and a chance to just show some technical ability.
I call it "lazy Willie," not "big Willie.
" Disgusting.
I'm not feeling too good about myself, because my dish sucked.
That did not work.
Tough challenge.
Some of you rose to it.
Some of you deflated across it.
There were two standout dishes tonight.
The first one had a perfect balance between the pasta and the filling.
You could taste the love that went into that.
That dish was made by Courtney.
- Good job.
- Good job.
Thank you.
- Well done.
- Thank you.
Now, tonight's winning dish The caramelle were definitely restaurant-quality.
This individual took the spirit of the night and literally made it their own.
A big congratulations, Jaimee Vitolo.
Well done.
Amazing.
Congratulations to Courtney and Jaimee.
You're both gonna be two phenomenal captains in the upcoming team challenge.
Well done.
Brilliant.
Now it's time for the bad news.
The three worst dishes of the night The first home cook that's in danger this evening over thought and underperformed.
Please step forward, Daniel.
The next dreadful dish that didn't understand the brief and completely made a mess of it.
Francis, step down, please.
The final home cook in danger tonight went way too far out of the box, out in orbit somewhere.
Big Willie.
Tonight all three of you were so desperate to stand out, and as a result, at least one of you will be standing outside of the MasterChef kitchen tonight.
Daniel and Willie, take a step forward, both of you.
Tonight, you both performed badly.
In fact, you were galaxies away from where we were hoping this was going.
And tonight, Daniel and Willie, you are both So lucky that you dodged that bullet.
Both of you, say good night to Francis, please, and go back to your stations.
See you.
See you later, man.
Francis, young man, you want to be different, you want to be quirky, and it's a time to shine.
Tonight, it just didn't work.
Yes, sir.
Our business is a craft.
It's not an art.
The pasta might've been rolled thin enough, but the puree didn't go right with it.
There are certain rights and wrongs in the kitchen, and it comes to putting food together.
Get that foundation solid, and you're gonna step into a kitchen and then take off, okay? Come say good-bye.
Thank you for everything, sir.
- Thank you.
- Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
Good luck to you, my friend.
- Good night.
- Thank you.
I'm very sad that I'm leaving.
Being here in the MasterChef kitchen has changed my life.
Francis, well done.
- Congratulations.
- Thank you, chef.
I really want to take everything I've got from here to the next level Congratulations, blue team.
And focus on a career I've always wanted to have, and that's working with food.
- It's delicious.
- Yes! Long live Scotland.
Great job.
Thank you, chef.
I wish I could've made it to top ten, but I will be that lonely 11th person flying off into the distance.
Next week, the home cooks face hundreds of football fans.
The MasterChef flag football game is about to start.
Push, push, push! Dig, dig, dig! Who will snap under the pressure? Y'all burning stuff.
I need you on the grill! and which team will battle the elements Come on, come on! Beat the rain, let's go! and claim victory? Ladies and gentlemen, this has been the closest result ever.
Whoo! Feeding hundreds of hungry football fans.
The MasterChef flag football game is about to start.
Go! Push! Push! Push! Dig! Dig! Dig! There will be fumbles in the kitchen.
Y'all burning stuff! Why is it so sloppy? Ugh! My god.
Some home cooks will snap under pressure.
I need you on the grill! Which team will battle the elements Come on, come on, beat the rain! Let's go! Go the whole 9 yards and claim victory? Go, christian! It's what we're all about! Ladies and gentlemen, this has been the closest result ever.
40 miles from the MasterChef kitchen, it's game time for the ten remaining home cooks as they take to the field of thousand Oaks High School to kick off their next team challenge.
Walking on a football field, man, it brings me back to home.
Brings me back to being under the Friday night lights again.
It doesn't get any more American than this.
Stands waiting to be filled with thousands of cheering fans.
This evening, there will be a football game happening right here.
Trust me, this place is gonna be packed.
You are gonna be split into two teams of five that'll have to serve the concessions to all of this football game's adoring fans.
Now, those fans are gonna be the ones voting on which one of you two teams will be the winner.
My family has been selling concessions for my entire life.
Perfect challenge for me.
Jaimee and Courtney, since you two had the best dishes in the last elimination challenge, you are tonight's team captains.
I'm a very soft-spoken person, and my biggest concern is not being able to be loud.
Jaimee, since you had the best dish in the last elimination, - you get to pick first.
- Yup.
But the teams are gonna be picked in a somewhat different manner.
Okay.
Instead of you, Jaimee, picking your own team, you're gonna be picking your opponent's team.
Okay! We don't get to pick our own teams.
I know she's gonna try and sink me right off the bat.
- Leslie.
- Leslie.
Courtney, congratulations, you got Leslie.
Wow.
Bad move.
Courtney, please, think about who you don't want on your team.
I'm going to choose this person because I really fear having both of them on the same team.
- Cutter.
- Cutter.
I'm building Jaimee's team up of people that I know cannot work with Leslie, because if he's gonna be the weakest link in my team, I can't make him any weaker than he already is.
Jaimee, time for your next pick.
- Christian.
- Wow, Christian.
Courtney, please.
- Daniel.
- Daniel, wow.
Okay, Jaimee, next up.
- Ahran.
- Ahran.
Courtney, three left.
Big Willie.
Okay, Jaimee, this is where you pick for both teams.
Who are you giving Courtney for her last pick? I Victoria.
Boom! High five, high five! All right.
Elizabeth, final pick.
Good job.
Okay, you will each have one hour to prepare, and then, you'll serve spectators throughout tonight's football game.
You guys are going to be making classic all-American food.
Turkey burgers and fish tacos.
If they take a burger from the blue team, they're also gonna take a burger from the red team.
Food needs to be ready when the game starts.
You guys had better keep up with that demand.
In the end, the fans will be deciding your fate.
It's time to meet the players.
Well done.
Great to see you guys.
This big game tonight will be overseen by a very, very special guest.
Guys, this evening's guest holds the record for the most rushing yards ever in one single season.
Ladies and gentlemen, NFL hall of famer Eric Dickerson.
Come on, Eric.
- Thanks.
- Hey, man, how's it going? Eric Dickerson comes out.
This guy is a legend.
He's one of my football idols.
What kid did not grow up and want to be him? Thank you, thank you.
Childhood obesity is a big problem in this country, And NFL play 60 is trying to fight that.
We want to try to encourage everyone to be active for at least 60 minutes a day.
What an amazing program.
Thank you.
MasterChef is happy to make a donation to Thousand Oaks High School in support of NFL play 60 initiative.
Red team, blue team, are you ready? Yes, chef.
Your one-hour prep starts Now! Off you go, kids, 20-yard line, with Eric.
In this challenge, both teams have just one hour to create a healthy burger and fish taco concessions for hundreds of hungry football fans.
For the burger, I think we have all this shredded cabbage, so we could make a badass coleslaw.
- It'll be awesome - Zou want coleslaw - on the burger? - Hell, yeah.
Jaimee put out some ideas, and I was like, "Oh, my god.
I think we in trouble.
" The coleslaw will hold up better than lettuce.
- Jaimee? - Yes.
Can I please share what I think about the burger with you? - Yeah.
- Rule number one, know your audience.
You're in Los Angeles.
Yeah, I don't think the coleslaw is a good idea - for the burger.
- Okay.
What do you think on the burger? Thousand island, grilled onions, simple lettuce.
- Okay.
- If you're not happy with that, Jaimee, say you're not happy with it.
Well, considering you guys didn't like my idea, which is fair enough I honestly don't think it's correct.
- I don't think it is either.
- Yeah, no, that's totally fine.
Okay, Thousand Oaks sauce, grilled onion.
You start the patties, I'll start the salsa, and I'll come jump on the patties with you.
Having been benched by her own teammates, Jaimee's red team has decided to make a turkey burger with Thousand Island sauce, and for the fish taco, corn salsa with coleslaw.
On the blue team, coach Courtney takes control.
We're not gonna put the avocado on the fish because I want to have it for the burger.
- Okay.
- And I would like you to come up with a different kind of a cream with, like, cilantro We can do a cilantro/lime cream Yes, I love cilantro and lime.
Come one, let's everybody work together.
We don't want to do a pressure test.
- No, no.
- And Leslie wants to be on a winning team.
That's right.
One, two, three Blue! Blue! The blue team has decided to go with a guacamole burger and for the fish tacos, a cilantro and lime cream sauce.
- Hut! - There you go.
Good job! First time we've seen Courtney as a team captain, so it'll be very interesting to see how she does.
I think blue team has the actual muscle behind them, and Courtney is gonna find a way to harness that out of them.
Jaimee is a captain.
She's not very vocal, she's not a spirited leader by nature.
She's a talented, talented cook.
This whole stadium, in 20 minutes, is gonna be full with screaming, ravished fans, so all I want to make sure is these teams are ready to feed them.
Don't worry about the salt and stuff right now.
Guys - Get those patties made.
- Guys? Right behind you, Jaimee.
I'm trying to be vocal about the things we need to get done, but people aren't listening to me.
A burger is We have two tort we need two tortillas, guys.
Hey, hey, hey, be careful not to talk over Jaimee.
I'm missing a lot of information from Jaimee.
It's got to get done.
While the red team struggles to get in the zone, the blue team is relying on Christian to score a touchdown with the turkey burger.
Ah! We got those burgers coming, Christian? I mean, I don't like the texture of it, it's too wet.
Christian puts too many eggs in our ground turkey, and our patties are really wet.
Right.
Christian, explain the mix.
What's in there? We got a little worcestershire sauce, we got a little oregano.
It looks very wet.
Yes.
Who added all those eggs in there? I did.
Unbelievable.
Do we have any more ground turkey? I don't think we do.
- We don't? - No.
We're running behind.
Look, the crowd is arriving.
We're up to our elbows in stuff to do, and time is ticking.
I'm definitely thinking we could be in trouble.
If you mess a protein up, you're screwed.
It's so important to nail those bloody proteins.
It's just so wet.
Why's it so sloppy? So if it's sticking like that on my hands, can you imagine what it's gonna be like on the grill? It's gonna stick like [bleep] to a blanket.
Hundreds of hungry fans are now arriving for tonight's big game, and the pressure is on for the home cooks.
Get those patties going, Daniel.
Come on, guys, we got this, all right? Push, you guys! Push, blue! In this challenge, each team will have to serve either a burger or a taco to each of the fans, but with just 20 minutes to go before service, the blue team is in big trouble with their turkey burger.
Unbelievable.
Have we cooked one off yet? We're cooking one off right now.
Is that it there? Yes, chef.
It's so wet.
You know, the wetter - I know it's [bleep] wet.
- But why'd you put so many eggs in there? Chef, I was not looking, and then it happened.
Christian was the one seasoning the meat and put the eggs in.
Our patties are really wet, and we can't put 'em on the grill 'cause they'll fall through the grill, So we're trying to figure out how they can keep their shape.
Oh, I know what's gonna toughen it up.
Makes more sense to throw it on the flat top.
I was like, "You know what? Why not take these burgers you can sear it on top of the flat top, and I'm sure they'll come out pretty good.
" You're a hero, Christian, a hero! Thank you, babe! There you go, that's perfect.
Thank you.
While Christian has solved the burger problem, Leslie's fish tacos are causing concern.
Put more seasoning.
I don't want to put too I'm telling you, you're gonna get It's gonna be too salty.
Just it just but it needs - to be flavored.
- I know, I I just learned something about Leslie, that he doesn't know how to season food properly.
For every one step forward that Leslie takes, he takes two steps backward.
Over on the red team, Cutter has taken over cooking the fish - How you doing, my man? - Not good, man.
It's breaking apart.
And it soon becomes clear that he is in over his head.
[bleep]! Cutter, please do not destroy any more fish, Cutter, - or I'm moving you.
- Well, Jaimee, I'm trying not to, babe.
It's a lot harder than it looks.
Cutter just can't get the movement of the spatula down.
Cutter, Cutter, come on.
You got to move 'em, Like, one piece at a time.
See, they don't fall apart on me.
So when he lifts the fish, he's breaking it, and it's a problem.
Ugh! My god.
Before service begins, the judges sample the blue team's food.
Taco looks nice.
Bland, right? Yeah, they need salt for sure.
Let's see if they were able to cook their turkey.
Looks juicy still.
Look at that.
Now, that's a turkey burger.
- That's delicious.
- That's awesome.
- Courtney? - Yes? - So tacos are bland.
- Okay.
Fish is really bland, needs a lot of season, a lot of work.
- Yes.
- Burger is absolutely delicious.
Thank you.
Good.
Who seasoned the turkey meat? - That was Christian.
- He nailed it.
Yes, he did.
He did a great job.
Who's seasoning the fish for the taco? That is Leslie's.
- You should go and manage Leslie.
- Bland, bland, bland.
Leslie is very stubborn.
If you yell at him, he just yells back and nothing gets done, but if you have chef Ramsay say it's not good, then he'll do it the right way.
Leslie, they want a lot more seasoning on the fish.
Eeee! Ugh! I'm staring at the fish and it looks perfect, but the judges want more salt, so I gave 'em more salt.
You want salt? I'm gonna give you salt.
Red team burger.
It's raw.
- Uh-ohh.
- No, don't eat that.
You see, this is the problem.
Jaimee, who cooked the burger? I did, chef.
- Come here.
- Yes, chef.
It's [bleep] raw.
It's raw.
Come on, guys, please.
- Take it back.
- Think the fish taco has the same problem? Take a bite, Graham.
- How's that, Graham? - No seasoning.
Try it.
- No seasoning.
- No seasoning? Taste it.
- Cutter.
- Come on, that's, like, a frozen fish fillet.
It is bland.
Come on.
Jaimee, come here.
There is nearly 1,000 fans sat behind you.
Got to get your team together.
- Yeah.
- Can you manage? Yeah.
- Get it together.
- Yeah.
Please? Let's go, now.
All right, guys, make sure that fish is cooked and make sure that turkey is cooked.
Oh, here it goes.
Here comes the marching band.
When that band stops playing, we're gonna start serving.
Yes, chef! The marching band's coming on the field, and I'm just looking at these bins of fish, and I'm thinking, "How the hell am I gonna get all these cooked?" Come on, old man.
It's all good, come on.
Y'all burning stuff! All those grills should be full now.
Okay? Come on, you can do this.
Come on, baby, you got it, you got it.
Yeah? Let's go, don't give up.
Pull it out! This is it! Now or never! Leslie's time to shine! He's gonna win! That's right, man.
I am not a five-time loser! The players are now taking the field.
The MasterChef NFL play 60 flag football game is about to start.
All right, blue, let's go, you guys! Come on, guys, we got this, all right? Red team, baby! Let's go, red team! Here they come! Let's go, guys! Coming at you.
Four burgers coming at you.
I got two tacos behind you.
Guacamole burger, thanks.
For their football concessions, the blue team's healthy turkey burger has guacamole and muenster cheese While the red team's has arugula and Thousand Island dressing.
Oh, taco.
Right here.
The blue team is serving a fish taco with slaw and cilantro cream sauce, while the red team's fish taco is topped with a corn slaw and an avocado cream sauce.
Don't want to get caught behind, guys.
Awesome fresh burgers! Thank you.
Everything's working really well.
We're like a well oiled machine.
I've got the wheels of my bus turning back there, Christian and Leslie pumping out fish and hamburgers.
I'll put cheese on 'em.
- I'll put cheese on 'em.
- My man.
Then I've got Victoria and Ahran right next to me.
Awesome! Ahran is topping my burgers with tomatoes and lettuce, and Victoria's got buns coming for me, like, every 30 seconds with the guac already on them, so we're working together really well.
Touchdown, number 61, blue team.
The lack of leadership on the red team is beginning to create mayhem.
That doesn't go on the fish.
Daniel! Jaimee, take it easy, baby.
Take it easy, okay? Well, it's, like, burgers madness.
Let's go! Hurry up, they're waiting, they're waiting! Everyone just stay cool.
It's complete chaos.
Daniel, buns, right here! Taco, we need tacos.
Jaimee, got to speed up.
- You got it, Jaimee? - No.
The red team is falling so far behind that frustrated customers are starting to walk.
Oh! Guys, we got to get organized.
We're losing customers.
Oh! Y'all need some more help up here? Yes, yes, Cutter! - Okay, what do you need? - I need help with the burgers.
- Burgers? - Here.
- Come on, guys.
- Tell me where to go, hurry up.
Just smile, be happy.
Hey, a burger? Hi, yeah.
Hey, have a good night.
Daniel, tell me where you need me to help.
I need you on the grill! The whole time I've needed you - on the grill! - Jaimee just said she needed me up here.
No, we need help getting the food out.
- Thank you.
- Right now.
Damn, quit hollering, dude.
Daniel, you just lost two votes.
There's no system.
You're crossing over each other.
You're running behind.
People are walking off.
Where is the communication? We're just losing votes left, right, and center.
- We have to talk.
- I know, I know.
I can see that Jaimee is just falling apart.
I mean, there's just way too much pressure for her.
The losing team faces a pressure test.
Come on, guys, we need to communicate! One minute left until half time.
Touchdown, blue team, in the MasterChef NFL play 60 flag football game.
Red team, look at me.
You're losing votes.
We need to communicate! - Elizabeth? - Yes, chef? Someone needs to expedite.
Someone needs to Two on the tacos, two on the burgers, - one grilling behind.
- Okay.
- Look at me, this is no voice.
- Yes, chef.
It's just all silent.
You just lost two votes.
I don't mind you being the expediter, - but I need a voice.
- Yes, chef.
Please, now.
- Yes, chef.
Two tacos, two burgers, all day! Tell me you heard me.
I heard you, two tacos.
Tacos coming.
Burger coming around.
This is my chance to save my team and to save my winning streak.
I got two burgers and three tacos all day! While Elizabeth tries to get the red team back in the zone, Joe checks in with the football crowd.
- Blue team, red team? - I like the red better.
You like the red team burger better? The verdict is split on which team's food is better.
Yeah, I'm gonna try the red team's taco.
- Little bland.
- Yeah.
- No taste.
- Try the blue team.
- Yeah.
- Better? - A lot better.
- Blue team? Blue team.
Touchdown, number 10! And with only one quarter left to play, it's still anyone's game.
Let's go! Come on, you guys! Push! Push! Push! Dig, dig, dig, guys! And now, it's [bleep] raining.
Let's go, let's beat this rain! Come on, come on! Beat the rain! Let's go! Go! Come on! Come on! Yeah, push it out! It starts downpouring.
So now we're, like, all hands on deck, as fast as we can.
Just over one minute to go! Go, Christian! It's what we're all about, man! I hear you.
Blue team, not a lose team! Hurry, let's push through! We got to get three more people! Let's go! Here! Run! Basket.
Five, four Put it in the basket.
Put it in the basket.
Three, two, one, and stop! Yeah, blue rules! Whoo! The crowd's votes have been counted, and now it's time to find out whose food the football fans preferred.
Thank you so much for turning out on a night of absolute British weather.
Thank you.
Now, on to the results.
Two amazing teams fought valiantly tonight both on the field and in the concessions stands.
But just, as you know, on the field of football, in MasterChef, there can only be one winning team at the end of the night.
Can't wait for them to say, "Leslie, you are no longer A freakin' loser!" Ladies and gentlemen, this has been the closest result ever in the history of this competition.
Tonight, the winning team I am just praying to god almighty that I don't go to another pressure test.
I don't know if my heart can handle it right now.
The team who just got the most amount of votes, Oh, my god.
congratulations Say "Blue.
" The winning team tonight Say "Blue.
" Say "Blue.
" Is The red team, ladies and gentlemen! Blue team, unfortunately, you know what that means.
You will now face the dreaded pressure test.
I felt I did my job and everybody on my team did their job.
Maybe it's just in the cards for me to be a total loser.
I don't know.
It's like, I don't know what else to [bleep] do.
After losing the MasterChef football concessions challenge, the blue team prepares themselves for a pressure test where at least one person will be sent home.
This is my fifth time.
It's like I know this place like the back of my hand.
I can count all the nails in all the boards.
Honestly, like, we lost 49 to 51.
It was so close.
But the reality is, no matter how close it is, the balcony's still really far away.
I'm pretty nervous.
This is my first pressure test, and the judges are really ratcheting up the competition, and so I'm pretty worried about what's gonna show up here, what I'm gonna have to do.
Blue team, it is time for you to face the dreaded pressure test.
But not all of you are going to have to cook tonight, and the person who will decide will be Courtney.
Just in case you were wondering, as the team captain, you can, based on that outstanding performance, save yourself if you wish.
I believe that the team worked so well together because they had a very good leader, and I'm going to save myself.
Excellent.
You're through to the top nine of this competition.
So your captain is safe.
Four of you remain I would have done the same thing.
But Joe, Graham, and myself are gonna save one more individual.
I would think my name has to be in this one.
I'm outdoing every one of these young, little whippersnappers, and I make 'em look silly.
The person that we truly think deserves to be safe up on the gallery is going to be Christian.
You were responsible for that amazing burger.
Even the first burger that you put out tasted delicious, and so did the last one.
Good job.
Thank you, chef.
I tell ya, I get no respect.
Leslie, nobody in the history of MasterChef has ever survived five pressure tests.
Well, you haven't met me yet.
Are you three ready to find out what you will have to cook tonight to stay in this competition? Yes, chef.
You know it's fresh, because these little guys are still moving.
Plucked from the ocean literally hours ago, still alive, prawns.
I want you to make a prawn dish that is elegant in its simplicity, light, refreshing Ceviche.
Raw prawns mixed with vegetables, chili, herbs, dressed with citrus juice, perfectly balanced.
I'm really relieved, seeing ceviche.
I'm like, "Yeah, I can do this.
" It's a few simple ingredients.
Now, please, head to your stations.
Hold on, hold on.
Come back.
Wait.
Unfortunately, I respectfully disagree with Graham.
Raw prawns are not the way to go.
I like tempura fried prawns.
The batter brings out the sweetness of a perfectly cooked prawn.
This is the best way to eat these little suckers.
Honestly, I think Joe and Graham are completely wrong.
My way is the best.
Butterflied prawns, stuffed and broiled.
Now, that's what I call a prawn.
In tonight's pressure test, you will be making all three of our favorite prawn dishes.
Wow.
You have just one hour to cook us three incredible prawn dishes with three very different preparations.
Now, please go to your stations.
You gotta do 3 dishes in 60 minutes.
- Is that impossible? - Nearly.
And there's one more thing.
There are three of you cooking in this pressure test tonight.
By the end of this challenge, just one of you will remain in the MasterChef kitchen.
Wow.
This is the top ten of this competition.
The stakes do not get any higher than this.
I feel sick to my stomach.
This is a nightmare of my first pressure test.
Your one hour starts Now.
I'm cooking for my life right now.
I want to open a Korean fusion restaurant, so I do not want to go home.
I feel stressed out.
Making three different dishes, it's a lot of damn pressure.
Come on, you [bleep].
He's the king of the pressure test, man.
I'm just as nervous as the people behind me.
They're just as good.
We're the top ten here.
This is no joke.
I don't underestimate 'em.
I just got to beat 'em.
So spot prawn.
Ceviche, tempura, and stuffed, three completely different techniques.
Totally different.
Ceviche, it's just the essence of that seafood.
Little bit of lime juice and some chilies, a bunch of fresh cilantro.
When you get a bite, you get all those flavors that pop through.
It's got to be sweet and spicy, right? - That's the concept of a ceviche.
- yeah, exactly, yup.
Tempura, for me, is making that batter just right so it's fluffy and it's crispy and it's salty.
Easy to overcook that, especially when you're frying them.
That oil's too hot, then there's too much Undercook or overcook.
Stuffing them, I like panko breadcrumbs with some fresh basil.
I'd be cooking my broiled spot prawns last.
They're the ones that can overcook and dry out the quickest.
Two people, bro.
Malibu man, you got an 18-year-old, you got a girl from Brooklyn, and you live overlooking the ocean where these spot prawns flip around in.
Is this a done deal? Are you the winner? I do best under pressure, so hopefully, I'm gonna take this home and not have to worry about it too much.
Good luck.
Ahran.
- Hi.
- How are we doing? I'm really stressed out.
Why are you stressing out? It's just that getting all of them done in 60 minutes is a bit of a challenge.
What about the ceviche? Have you made it before? I don't even know what it's supposed to taste like.
Yeah, it's really large.
You need it to be the right size so that it'll marinate.
- Okay.
- Yeah.
Two of the three of you are going home.
You don't have a lot of room for error, obviously.
No room.
This is unreal.
- Victoria.
- Yes, chef? What are you most nervous about? Is it tempura? Is it the broiled? Honestly, it's the broiled, chef, because I know how it can easily overcook.
They're more difficult than cooking a lobster.
I mean, are you confident that Leslie and Ahran will fall short on this one tonight? I have to be confident, chef.
There's only one of us who's gonna survive, and I'm gonna be the one who survives.
Good luck.
Oh! You can't be scared, Ahran.
Ahran is scared to death.
She's not even handling them properly.
She hasn't even touched Look, she's going at the shrimp with two With big towels and trying It's all wrong.
It's only getting better, Ahran.
Ahran has done great things in the kitchen, but this is the first time where she's showing her age.
So now, Ahran is aimless.
If only one is going home, maybe you feel like you could slide through.
When two out of three are going home, no place to hide.
Oh, man.
this is crazy.
I mean, this is almost impossible.
I am so thankful to be safe in the balcony.
I didn't just dodge a bullet, I dodged a hand grenade.
In tonight's pressure test, three home cooks Victoria, Leslie, and Ahran have to prepare prawns three ways.
At the end of this challenge, only one will remain in the competition.
Ahran, how are you feeling? Not very good, chef.
Doesn't sound like the Ahran I know.
I'm really stressed right now.
Hey.
You can do this.
Think what you've done in this competition so far.
- Yeah.
- Okay? And rely on that palate like you have done so far.
- Yes, chef.
- Don't put your head down.
- Yes, chef.
- Come on, you can do this.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.
I am the youngest competitor here, but I'm also one of the strongest, and I cannot be a wimp in this point in the game.
Two minutes to go.
Ooh, that went fast.
Two out of the three are going home.
That's not a nice position to be in, is it? Double the pressure that we've ever seen in the pressure test.
Huge, huge.
Whew.
Here we go.
You can still do it, Ahran.
You're almost there.
Clean those plates, please.
Here we go.
Ten, nine, eight There you go, Victoria.
Six, five, four, three, two, one.
Hands in the air! All three of you, please bring your trays down to the front, thank you.
I hate to wish ill on people, but honestly, I'm wishing ill on Ahran and Leslie.
This is a pressure test that's designed almost to incite epic failure.
It's time to taste your amazing Santa Barbara spot prawns three ways.
So, Leslie, I wanted the ceviche.
What exactly do we have in here? A little lime juice, lemon juice, salt, pepper, tomato, a little jalapeno just to add some heat.
And, um The perfect texture.
The seasoning could have been a little more, but the acidity of that ceviche was right on.
- Thank you.
- Good job.
Thank you, chef.
Ahran.
So you looked stressed.
I felt more stressed than I was taking the S.
A.
T.
S.
Really? But I'm glad I was able to pull through in the end.
Now, with the ceviche, what all did you put in there? I put peppers, blood orange, lemon, lime, some sugar, salt, cilantro, sherry vinegar, olive oil.
There's a lot of liquid in there.
Too much liquid, too - Almost pickled 'cause of the vinegar.
- Okay.
The great thing about it though, is the use of those chilies.
Really pop through and actually help accentuate the flavor of the spot prawn.
- Okay.
- Thanks.
Victoria.
The thing here is It's like a cocktail.
- Yup.
- You know what I mean? - Mm-hmm.
- And there is definitely - a lot of onion - Yes, there is.
Going on through here.
The onion really is overpowering the natural sweetness of that prawn.
Definitely.
- Thanks.
- Thank you.
Tempura.
Tough challenge, huh, Leslie? Very tough, yes.
So looking at Victoria's and Ahran's tempura, how do you feel about yours? - I think mine is pretty good.
- Yeah? Not as crispy as I would have liked them to be, but I tend to like a thinner batter in my tempura too.
It's a very simple tempura, very light, but in this case, these shrimp are so good, I'm thinking that maybe that was strategic.
Well, it's all about the shrimp.
It's not about what you're putting on it.
Ahran.
Looks very nice.
Thank you.
The color is much more golden brown - than everyone else's.
- Yeah.
Feel good about that? Not really, 'cause I feel like when I go to a Japanese restaurant, the color should be lighter.
Rich, and your shrimp is cooked well.
- Thank you.
- Tastes like tempura you might get at a restaurant.
Thank you.
It's very white.
What was the temperature of the oil? It was lower than I had wanted it to be.
Be nice if they were a little golden brown, but the shrimp inside actually looks like it's cooked well.
You know, it's got a good crispiness.
It's got the right density.
I think probably better than the other two.
It's good.
The cook was good.
- Thank you, sir.
- Thank you.
Right, describe your broiled Santa Barbara spot prawns.
The spot prawns were sliced in half, put a little salt and pepper on 'em, put some of the sauce from the other shells in with the bread crumbs.
The prawns are cooked beautifully.
Great flavor, beaufully seasoned, breadcrumbs fragrant.
Slightly concerned about that sauce that you put in the breadcrumbs.
I just wouldn't have made them so soggy.
There's two of you going home tonight.
- You know that, right? - Yes.
Good.
Ahran, Ahran, Ahran.
Describe your spot prawns, broiled, please.
They're just sliced in half, and then the breadcrumb mixture is breadcrumbs, some parsley, and salt, pepper, just a little, though, 'cause I didn't want to put too much.
The actual spot prawn are glistening in terms of the cook, beautifully done.
- Thank you.
- But What's the one thing that absolutely is missing on that? Salt.
- Thank you.
- Thank you.
Victoria, what's in the breadcrumb mixture? Salt and pepper, and they were toasted in some butter as well as some tarragon.
So visually, from here, they look like they're a little bit sort of drowned in breadcrumbs.
Yes, chef.
Why so many breadcrumbs on top? I never made it before, honestly, so I just made that choice.
Yeah.
Damn.
Oh, Victoria, it's raw.
Oh, Victoria.
It's raw.
Damn, damn, damn.
Seasoned beautifully, but cooked terribly.
Damn.
This is what my nightmares are made of, and it's right there on the plate.
Leslie, Ahran, Victoria, as you know, only one of you will survive tonight.
Please excuse us, 'cause we have got two very difficult decisions to make right now.
Damn.
I think the amount of breadcrumbs that Victoria put on hers stopped them from cooking, but everything else tasted fine.
Ahran made a pretty significant error as well, putting the sherry in the ceviche.
Leslie's, I don't think they were that bad.
They weren't that good.
Top ten's gonna be top eight in a second.
It's tough.
All three of you have one thing in common.
You guys are extremely talented, but tonight, only one of you will be safe from elimination.
The first home cook that we are sorry to see leave the MasterChef kitchen, please step forward and say good-bye Victoria.
Victoria, we're very fond of you, but tonight, the stuffed prawns were as raw as the ceviche, a technical error at this point that was just too much.
Yes, sir.
Please put your apron on your bench.
It's hard to say good-bye, but I'm excited to move on to what's next.
Victoria.
Boom! Yes! I came into this loving food, and honestly, it's only grown 100%.
I am stoked about my future.
I am stoked about what I've learned here at MasterChef.
Team blue! And I'm ready to hit the ground running and burn it down.
Whew, tough.
Um Tonight, this is a tale of our eldest versus our youngest, and how ironic is that, when I think back of the battles and the arguments you two have had, and yet, you've both grown to put your head down and respect each other.
Leslie, give us a little insight to the journey.
Is it everything you could have imagined? And more.
I did not expect to meet as talented people as I have.
I did not expect to grow the way I have been growing And to work out my differences with this young lady.
She's not a girl.
She's a young lady.
Ahran, how's the journey been for you? You know, to really be able to achieve my dream and get coaching from you amazing mentors is such an honor.
Leslie and Ahran, it hurts all three of us to say this more than you'll ever know.
The person leaving tonight is Ahran.
It's a very bittersweet moment.
I kind of felt that bond, you know? Maybe it's me missing my own daughter.
I really, honestly learned to care for this person.
Young lady, you've been amazing.
Unfortunately, tonight, Santa Barbara spot prawns got the better of you, but let me tell you something.
and you are so mature.
Thank you.
Light-years ahead of any other 18-year-old we ever had in this competition, let me tell you.
I can't wait to see where you're going.
You have not reached your potential.
Well done, my darling.
Thank you.
Come and say good-bye.
Thank you.
Great job.
- Thank you.
- Well done, darling.
- Thank you.
- Well done.
Now, before you go home and get those schoolbooks out, who's gonna win MasterChef? Leslie.
Love you, girl.
Wow.
Now, that is a turnaround and a half.
Well done, my darling.
Thank you.
Please, put your apron on your bench.
I'm very proud of myself for coming this far, and I think I am definitely someone who gives hope to a lot of 18-year-olds who have a dream but are scared of really pushing towards it.
Where's the baby? Ahran, well done.
Oh, my god! Wow, it looks gorgeous.
- Thank you.
- That has the base of possibly one of the best dishes we've ever had.
Thank you so much.
This is an excellent dish and a super example of what cooking from the heart from the family can be on a plate.
Good job, Ahran.
Thank you.
I've never heard my parents tell me that they're proud of me until I entered the competition.
So it's a huge deal for me, and nothing could give me that satisfaction.
Nothing.
Next week, on MasterChef You got to get in the oven fast.
The home cooks pair up If you want to check it, check it.
And Gordon Ramsay joins them for a game of chicken.
Are you kidding me? This is gonna be epic.
Some will rule the roost It's kind of a dreamy dish.
while others fall foul.
I don't expect to see that kind of crap at this stage of the game.
And a shocking twist Tonight's pressure test or should I say, "Tests"? will eliminate one more hopeful.
Gordon Ramsay: Tonight on "Hotel hell" A near fatal accident has left Mississippi hotel owners in a desperate situation.
I broke both of my ankles.
- and back.
- and back in two places.
Gordon: The business is failing.
and with not enough money coming in, This married couple have lost their home.
- You're living here? There's not even a window.
- Yes.
You have to do what you have to do.
Gordon: If I don't do something soon, 
Tonight - You gotta get them into oven fast.
The final eight pair up You want to check it, check it.
and Gordon Ramsay joins them for a game of chicken.
Are you kidding me? This is gonna be epic.
Some will rule the roost - It's kind of a dreamy dish.
- while others fall foul.
I don't expect to see that kind of crap at this stage of the game.
and a shocking twist Tonight's pressure test or should I say, tests? will eliminate one more home cook.
Come on down.
My heart is absolutely in food, and I put everything on the line and quit my job in the video game industry to be here.
You don't gamble, you can't win.
It's down to eight.
I got seven more people to knock down.
It's like a domino effect.
As soon as I knock one down, they're all gonna fall.
We began the search for this year's MasterChef tasting dishes from thousands and thousands of home cooks, and now we're down to you eight.
Wow.
Honestly, all of you, right now, should feel incredibly proud.
Yeah.
But you should also be feeling the pressure.
Tonight you'll be cooking in pairs.
Again? Oh, my god.
The person who's going to pick your teams is You.
- Right on.
- That's right, you.
You will pick your own teams.
Pick your partners smartly.
Trust me, best friends don't always make great teams.
- Don't look so shocked.
- Off you go.
Let the bidding wars begin.
They let all the animals out of the cage, and everybody's vying for position.
- Elizabeth.
- Elizabeth.
Elizabeth.
I feel like a cool kid.
I'm like, "This is awesome.
" I wish I had been popular in high school.
It probably felt like this.
I'm a hot commodity.
It's like, I should be in high demand.
It's like the school dance.
- Daniel? - Daniel? How do I tell Courtney, "Mm, never, not in a million years"? Jaimee, wanna do it? You and I could be the match made in heaven.
Sorry, Willie.
I'm willing to listen to your ideas.
I'm the best working horse you'll ever get.
Leslie basically says, "You can have complete creative control.
" And I'm like, "sold.
" Willie, let's do it.
All right, Christian.
- What? - Wow.
Your palate, my palate is right up there, so why not? You need me, girl.
- Now, that is interesting.
- I did not see that coming.
Leslie, you were like the insurance salesman.
Pushingshe was, like, trying to push you away.
I work in advertising, as you know, and I appreciate the power of a great pitch.
And leslie came up and basically said, "I will let you control me.
" And then he had me.
I will never admit to any of that.
Mr.
Submissive.
- What's happened to you? - Oh, my god.
Now that you have your teams, it's time to find out exactly what you will have to cook as a pair.
Now, a MasterChef has to be many things, but to win this competition, you definitely cannot be chicken.
But Buddy.
Each team is only going to get to cook with one different part of this amazing chicken.
One of the most popular cuts anywhere, these beautiful things, chicken wings.
I'd love to see a stuffed chicken wing.
I do not want to see a boring fried chicken wing.
Next, the legs.
Down, push through, And then just let the knife do the work.
Beautiful drum, very forgiving, steeped in the most amazing flavor.
And then the bit that everybody wants: the actual chicken breast.
Probably one of the most recognized cuts, but let's be honest, one of the easiest to overcook.
Which brings me to the final cut, very often overlooked, and it's called the chicken oyster.
The oyster is that little gem of meat that's tucked away underneath the thigh.
One of the most tender parts of the chicken, one of the most flavorsome, and it's a chef's dream.
Watching chef Ramsay break down a chicken He just, like And then the chicken just magically fell into, like, eight parts.
So in the pantry, there are four boxes.
Each has a different part of the chicken inside.
You will be picking the boxes completely at random.
You'll have five minutes to collect your chicken and to gather all the ingredients that you need for that dish.
The two teams with the best dishes will be safe from elimination.
The teams with the worst dishes will go into the pressure test where at least one of you will be eliminated.
- Are you ready? - Yes, chef.
Your five minutes in the pantry starts Now.
Come on.
Let's go.
Run, Christian! So they're going in there, and they're assuming they're gonna get assigned a chicken part, and they'll shop for that.
Got the box, Christian.
Got the box.
Little do they know - Open it.
- Can't open it.
It's locked.
Oh, oh, it's definitely locked.
Okay.
They will not know what chicken part they're shopping for.
How do you do that? We got to get stuff in the basket.
We got to shop blindly, basically.
All right, let's go.
- We'll need an onion, right? - Yeah.
We just got to think of everything we can get.
First of all, this is dangerous, I mean very dangerous, because you can't just focus on one particular dish.
So you cover all bases and shop for four cuts.
I have a dish that would work with three out of the four cuts.
I couldn't have picked a better partner.
She's smart.
She knows where she wants to go with this dish.
It's a New Delhi curry.
I've made it a million times.
It's awesome.
It knocks everybody's socks off.
I'm thinking to myself, "Wow, man.
Did I pick a winner, finally.
" Are you cool with that? I mean Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
You tell me what you want.
That works for me.
Stick to home.
Let's stick to home.
I think the chicken should be lemon pepper.
That's kind of plain and simple.
Okay, well, think of something else.
I think dumplings with a butternut squash would be amazing.
I don't think so.
I told him I don't think chicken and dumplings is a good idea, but Cutter don't listen.
It's like his way or the highway.
Let's go, guys.
Let's go.
Right.
In front of you is the key to this challenge.
Please open those boxes.
- Get in.
- Come on, Courtney! What cut chicken have you got? I'm hoping it's the big ol' breast.
And it is.
A big ol' chicken breast.
- Oysters.
- Oysters.
I don't want wings, 'cause that's the biggest challenge as far as I'm concerned.
We're really hoping for the legs.
It's the chicken legs.
It's exactly what we wanted.
I know we can make an amazing dish with this.
The wings.
Not what I wanted, man.
Honestly, not what I wanted.
It's got the least amount of meat on it.
That's gonna be a tough one to knock out of the park.
You will have 45 minutes to cook us the very best chicken dish of your entire life.
Is everyone ready? - Yes, chef.
- Yes, sir.
Your 45 minutes starts Now.
Christian and I are doing a pan-seared chicken thigh over a "cannelli" bean puree with a heirloom tomato sauce.
I know that it's gonna work for us.
Come on, guys.
Speed up.
Wow.
What about those teams? I mean, here's the big one for me: Christian, Courtney.
Never would have thought that these guys would have picked each other.
Well, you know, the past is the past.
I mean, we don't want to be the ones to go home, you know? I'm thinking for the chicken oysters, I think we just season them simply, simply.
Yes, yes, yes, yes, yes.
- Saute them in a pan.
- I agree.
Why did Elizabeth pick Leslie? He convinced her.
He got on his knees and said, "I'll do whatever you want.
You got to pick me.
" Oh, wow.
He's a crafty old dog, this little schmuck.
Okay, so how do you want to do the wings? Jaimee and Daniel have the wings.
That's the devil in the box tonight.
That's the one that nobody wants.
Would they go down that gourmet route? Would they do that chicken lollipop, - you know, when you scrape all the meat down? - Very technical.
I don't know if they have that kind of experience.
- How do you get that out? - I don't know.
The dumplings may not be the right way.
Let's just get that chicken in there, and then we can talk about it while we're doing everything else.
Cutter and Willie Dream cut was the breast.
They should have the best dish.
So, here, you've got the chicken, and I'll start making the broth.
I can get the hollandaise going with the boil, and we'll get the asparagus.
- What is he doing? - Oh, no.
Oh, no.
Getting the hollandaise ready.
Cutter, did you just say hollandaise with a broth? No, hollandaise on the asparagus.
With a broth.
No? Ten minutes gone.
Let's go.
- Right, Elizabeth.
- Hi, chef.
Describe the dish.
A sauteed, marinated chicken oyster, and then we're making a green New Delhi curry to go around the outside.
Love that idea.
Whose idea was this? This was my idea.
- What's going on, Daniel? - What's up, Joe? How's it going? How do you turn wings into an entree? That's what I was curious about.
We got some oven-roasted fingerling potatoes.
We're gonna mix that up with a little arugula at the end.
We're gonna make sure that these things are packed with flavor.
But I still don't understand the dish, because chicken wings on the bone still doesn't seem like an entree to me, especially a restaurant-quality entree.
But that's the hand we were dealt, so we'd better roll with it, right? - Big Willie, Cutter.
- Yes, chef.
You got the breast, the dream cut.
Okay, what's the dish? It's a lemon pepper roasted chicken that we're gonna make a butternut squash chicken and dumplings with.
Chicken and dumplings? What? I think of a chicken breast, I don't think of a dumpling.
- Whose idea was that? - The dumpling was my idea.
Dumplings? And it's gonna be in a chicken broth.
Cutter had all these ideas that just didn't make sense.
Rule number one: You don't put a breast in a broth.
Well, I just figured the lemon pepper chicken breast was too simple.
Really? You don't put a breast that's beautiful In a [bleep] broth.
There's only 20 minutes.
We don't have time to make another dish.
We're in trouble.
Like, a lot of trouble.
You don't put a breast that's beautiful in a [bleep] broth.
- Okay.
- You know that.
- And you know that.
- Yes, chef.
- Okay.
- Good luck.
All right, guys.
Courtney, what are you guys working on? This is my sauce, and our chicken is resting here.
We cut it, so it would cook faster and have a really nice So it's not like one giant piece.
How did you cook it? Because this stuff takes at least 30 minutes.
We pan-seared it very well, put it in the oven, and then we basted it.
We checked the temperature on both pieces.
Okay, 'cause remember, close to the bone, if we cut into that and it's bleeding and it's red Yes, Christian got here on fried chicken.
His signature dish is chicken.
I know he's not gonna go home on a chicken.
All right.
Good luck.
Just under eight minutes to go.
Come on.
Please.
Speed up.
The dish of the night for me that sounds absolutely delicious is a light chicken oyster curry - Nice.
So smart.
- With fragrant rice.
Elizabeth and Leslie.
She's actually spoon-feeding him.
- "Have a little taste of this, darling.
" - No way.
"Taste that.
" I swear to god.
No, it's like the MasterChef love boat out there, honestly.
Which team is not gelling? Cutter and Willie are opposite ends.
Yeah, they are on two different teams.
Just try this.
It's like they each made a dish and combined them into one.
I like that.
I like that too.
How are the dumplings? We're dropping it now.
They're dropping the dumplings.
Do they know what they're doing? I love that.
And Jaimee and Daniel seem to be a little bit in trouble, because they didn't consider how challenging it would be to make an entree out of chicken wings.
They've got great flavor.
One minute remaining.
Run and get a ring mold right now.
Let's go, guys.
Finish it up.
Make sure that chicken is cooked.
The last thing we want to eat is raw chicken.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one and stop.
Hands in the air.
Well done.
Okay, first up, Elizabeth, Leslie.
Beautiful.
Describe your dish.
These are marinated, sauteed chicken oysters in an Indian curry sauce and roasted cumin ginger baby carrots.
Tell me about this curry.
It's a shallot, mushroom, and serrano pepper base with a lot of cumin and some lime to finish.
Wow.
The curry's rich.
The rice is perfectly cooked, the chicken caramelized perfectly, but they're still moist, and the carrots are fabulous.
It's kind of a dreamy dish.
Thanks.
Wow.
It looks beautiful.
Vibrant, mouthwatering.
How'd you cook the oysters? We marinated them in yogurt and lime and scallions first, and then we just sauteed them in a pan, high heat, just to get the color on them.
A little salt and pepper.
Really simple.
It's delicious.
I mean, phenomenal.
but the smartest move on this plate tonight was Leslie sticking to you like a magnet.
- Great job, seriously - Thank you, chef.
Elizabeth - and Leslie.
- Thank you.
- Great job.
- Thank you.
Good job, Leslie.
Thank you, Elizabeth.
Good job.
I just got her to cook me a meal, taught me her techniques.
Think about that for a minute.
Who's the smart one here? Jaimee Vitolo, Daniel, please.
Let's go.
Daniel and I had a really hard piece of chicken to work with, but I'm feeling pretty confident.
Please describe your dish.
We have chicken wings basted with sage, rosemary, thyme, butter, chorizo, and bacon fat, fingerling potatoes with arugula, and oven-roasted baby carrots.
No matter how good wings taste, they're probably the most unsexy thing that you can watch somebody eat.
I mean, it's a great dish.
It's got some crispness to the skin, but I would have liked to have seen it just somehow cooked down a little longer.
That skin just continues to crisp up.
But overall, I mean, you guys really did a great job with what you were given.
- Good job.
- Thank you so much.
Thank you, chef.
It looks like, you know, a nice dish that I would expect to get maybe in a airport restaurant.
It's nice.
The sauce is, like, very It's a white wine lemon sauce, very Italiano.
Was that yours? You made the sauce? He started it, and I finished it.
And the chicken is actually crispy.
- You cooked it? - Yes, sir.
It's good.
Did it blow me away? No.
It's an interesting fusion of your two visions, I think.
Thank you.
That was weird.
Okay, the unlikely duo of tonight Let's go, Laurel and Hardy-- I mean, Cutter and Willie.
Wow.
Wow, wow, wow.
First it was a broth.
It was butternut squash dumplings.
It was hollandaise.
It was grilled asparagus.
Where's the asparagus? Where's the hollandaise? Where's the broth? What the [bleep] happened? Well, it's a combination of everything.
We took three grilled asparagus.
And we had the chicken breast laid it on top.
We reduced the broth down to a light sauce with the root vegetables.
And what happened to the hollandaise? It broke.
It broke on me, and I didn't have Thank god for that.
The chicken breast, it's bland.
The asparagus got the butts on.
I thought I cut enough of the butt off.
I apologize.
I don't expect to see that kind of crap at this stage of the game.
Okay.
And let's not forget that you had the cut that everybody wanted.
And then you give it the clumsy look with the almost like the bottom of a stockpot.
The butts of the asparagus.
So I'm not impressed.
- Are you impressed? - No, chef.
- Are you impressed? - Not at all.
Did you work together? Not as much as we should have.
Thank you.
Good night.
Let's not forget that you had the cut that everybody wanted.
And then you give it the clumsy look with the almost like the bottom of a stockpot.
So I'm not impressed.
- Are you impressed? - No, chef.
- Are you impressed? - Not at all.
Did you work together? Not as much as we should have.
Thank you.
Good night.
Cutter had all these ideas and was not able to execute any of them.
And I'm even upset because I didn't say anything.
And now we could be facing the pressure test.
Last up, the team of Christian and Courtney.
I am so proud of this dish.
We've applied all of the notes the judges have given, so this dish should be an A-plus.
All right, so let's talk about the teams first.
Christian, how was it working with Courtney? I definitely have a brand-new respect for her.
- Same for me.
- And it was great working with her.
You guys are both equally great home cooks, you know? Yes.
So it's good that you get to work side by side.
All right, walk me through what we have.
What you have is the leg and the thigh.
I braised it with tarragon, garlic, butter, and olive oil.
And then Courtney, she braised the brussels sprouts.
Um, white beans? - Yes, we did "cannelli" beans.
- Cannellinis? And then I did an heirloom tomato that I pan-roasted.
That right there is That's the money shot.
- Look at that caramelization.
- Yeah, it is.
Awesome.
Really, really good job, guys.
Wow, thank you.
Thank you, chef.
Yeah, that's a dish that I'd love to sit down and have for dinner.
- Great job working together.
- Thank you.
Thank you, chef.
Right, who cooked the chicken? I did, chef.
Chicken's got a great sear on it, but I want a bit more work on the plate at this stage of the game.
Yes, chef.
I thought the bone would have come out the thigh.
I thought you would have trimmed the drum and got a really nice presentation on there.
Chicken tastes delicious.
The seasoning is spot-on.
White beans beautifully done.
But the brussels sprouts and the tomatoes I [bleep] hate.
Caramelized brussels sprouts do not go with tomatoes.
- Yes, chef.
- Bacon, sprouts, definitely.
Tomatoes, chicken, definitely.
But not sprouts and tomatoes.
Let's get that right.
Yes, chef.
Bit like you two.
You're never gonna get married, are you? No, chef.
There you go.
Thank you.
Thank you, chef.
Thank you.
All four teams took your chicken parts and attempted to elevate them into restaurant-quality dishes.
What we need to do now is decide which two teams will be headed up to the balcony to be safe and which two teams will go into the pressure test.
Please, we need a moment.
Good job.
Sorry, man.
It was a team effort.
Cutter and Willie did not work together.
- No.
- And we could taste that.
Clearly, they're the one team that's in the pressure.
The other three are pretty close.
Elizabeth and Leslie's, incredible.
You made a whole curry? Yeah.
Did you do it with dried spices, or did you Don't share our secrets.
And Courtney and Christian The cook on that chicken was awesome.
Brussels sprouts and the tomatoes did not work together.
Tomatoes and brussels sprouts? What the [bleep] were you thinking? Honestly, I didn't know.
But Daniel's and Jaimee's, I mean, they got the wings, which is the toughest one.
Much more impressive than I thought it was gonna be.
I think that the skin could have been a little crispier.
Let's go.
It was a difficult challenge, and I have to tell you, it was not an easy decision.
The first team that is safe easily the best dish of the night, Leslie and Elizabeth.
Great job.
Well done.
You're safe.
Please head up to the balcony.
Good job.
Finally, I'm a winner.
I don't have to do the pressure test.
Great dish.
- Thank you.
- Really well done.
So nice to see a dish with that kind of finesse at this stage of the competition, brilliant.
- Thank you.
- Thanks.
The second team safe from elimination tonight, with their very simple, classic dish Congratulations Courtney and Christian.
Well done.
- Great job.
- Thank you.
- Good job.
- Thank you.
Great job.
You four home cooks cooked us the worst dishes of the evening.
You know what that means: a dreaded pressure test.
Yes, chef.
At least one of you will be going home.
Please take those white aprons off and put these ones on.
Thank you.
Tonight's pressure test is going to work a little differently.
Oh, man.
Or should I say tests? Tonight's pressure test is going to work a little differently.
Or should I say tests? Oh, man.
We'll start with four home cooks.
Whoever wins the first challenge will be saved.
Then we'll head into another battle with three home cooks, then two.
Those two remaining home cooks will then go head-to-head in an all-or-nothing, do-or-die battle.
Lose that battle, your time in this kitchen is done.
You don't want to be involved in that final head-to-head battle.
Get safe on that balcony as quick as you can.
Whatever this challenge is, first round, I have to nail it, because I can't go through these emotions.
You all just took part in that chicken challenge, but what comes first? The chicken or the egg? Every dish that you will have to make us tonight in every stage of this pressure test will feature the humble egg.
First up, we want all four of you to prepare an egg in a simple fashion.
For the first challenge, you will need to perfect the poached egg.
Perfect, smooth, silky.
And guess what.
You only get one egg.
- That's right, one egg or bust.
- God.
Wow.
Head to your stations.
It's way too intense, knowing you only get one shot at it, and failure could mean going home.
Can't go home because of eggs.
You all have everything you need to make us one perfectly poached egg.
Your ten minutes starts Now.
- Wow.
- This is really hard.
Yeah, a tough one.
One egg.
One mistake, and you're out.
What is the technique to keeping that egg white together? Poached egg, it takes 3 1/2 to 4 minutes, so if I was doing this tonight, that five minutes, gotta get the water perfectly done.
Season the water first.
Touch of vinegar in it.
How much vinegar do you put in? A drop.
Vinegar strengthens the egg white, So it stops it from separating.
The thing is, you do not want to taste that vinegar.
And then you would get a vortex.
Then crack it in with three minutes to go.
Only having one egg to poach, that's the kicker, 'cause it's impossible for this guy with these hands to just do everything perfect the first time.
Three minutes remaining.
This is the secret.
The secret is, sing Amazing grace three times, you have the perfect poached egg.
I'm going up to that balcony.
He's stirring it with the egg inside, which is the most dangerous thing to do, 'cause that spoon could slice that egg in half.
Come on, Daniel.
Last ten seconds.
Come on.
Let's go.
Nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one, stop.
Hands in the air.
Well done.
God! Bring 'em down.
I get my egg out.
And I nicked it, and that's all it took was just a little small nick.
Yolk just goes, everywhere.
Right, Jaimee.
Okay.
That's poached nicely.
The yolk, silky, warm, and absolutely spot-on.
Needs a touch of salt, seasoning, but by and large, you've done a great job.
Thank you.
Willie, what's your technique on this? I put a tablespoon of vinegar, and I sung Amazing grace three times in my head.
and I'm hoping that it came out right.
Let's see if Jesus is a fan of eggs.
I'm worried, with a tablespoon of vinegar, - that it's going to taste - Vinegary.
A little too vinegary.
You know what it tastes like? Vinegar? Delicious egg.
Yes! Good job, Willie.
Oh, thank you, Jesus.
"Thank you, jesus," indeed.
Oh, lordy.
Okay, Daniel.
Where's the rest of the egg? I broke the egg in the water, and I lost the yolk.
- You lost the yolk? - I did.
- There's no yolk in here? - There's no yolk there.
I apologize.
Uh-oh, no one's home.
Knock-knock.
This is very difficult, to separate the white from the yolk.
Wow.
I don't need to taste that.
No.
If it wasn't so sad, it'd be funny.
Cutter.
Damn.
What happened? I went to set it on the plate, and it broke.
If there's one thing you can't do, it's manhandle a poached egg.
Damn.
What a shame.
Actually tastes quite nice.
Yolk, silky.
Cooked beautifully.
What a shame you burst it.
Potentially could have been one of the best of the night.
Damn.
It's cooked beautifully.
Big floating island.
They both look beautiful.
Damn.
The best egg, and the home cook that is now safe to cook another day Please head up to the balcony The best egg, and the home cook that is now safe to cook another day Please head up to the balcony Big Willie.
Thank oh, thank you, jesus.
Good job.
Great job.
Well done.
So Big Willie is safe, and after this, one more will be saved.
Then, for the two remaining, it's a head-to-head battle to see who will be going home.
Cutter, Daniel, Jaimee, are you ready to find out what all three of you are gonna have to cook in this next battle? Yes, chef.
We want you to make a dish that initially hides the egg: Egg yolk ravioli with a soft egg yolk inside.
You want that yolk to just ooze out, But it still needs to be warm.
This is an incredibly technical, difficult dish to pull off.
On your stations, you'll find everything that you need to make us one egg yolk ravioli.
Is everybody ready? Yes, chef.
Your 15 minutes start Now.
Just think of the quantum leap from a poached egg to an egg yolk ravioli.
It's double the pressure now, because you're still doing, in essence, A poached egg, but with a wrapping of pasta.
This is so tough.
The secret's all about the pasta being transparent, wafer thin.
And then sealing that deal when you put those two disks together, to make sure there's not a speck of water in there.
One little seep of water through there, and you are done.
What's he doing with a fork? He shouldn't be using the fork on that.
Gently, Cutter.
Last minute.
Come on.
Ten Put 'em up.
nine, eight, seven, six Let's go.
This is it.
- Five - Come on, guys.
- Four, three - Run! Two, one.
And stop.
Good girl.
Well done.
Okay, Jaimee.
And now, for the moment of truth You ready? - Yes.
- Let's do it.
- Daniel.
- Chef.
It looks like maybe you didn't seal it enough here.
And that means that the water gets in there and starts cooking that egg more.
That's no bueno.
Cutter.
Shape looks great.
What am I expecting to get in the middle? Should have a silky yellow center, chef.
Not raw? No, sir.
Yeah, I mean, it's rich, it's silky.
- But water got in.
- Boiling water got in.
Hers was completely liquid.
The person that is safe, that produced the best egg yolk ravioli, is Cutter.
Great job.
You nailed it, young man.
Pasta cooked beautifully, egg yolk rich, seasoned to perfection.
Well done.
Thank you, chef.
Man, 1,000 pounds off my chest.
That pressure test is no joke.
Get me upstairs.
And then there were two.
One of you will stay, and one of you will leave MasterChef.
Daniel and Jaimee, it all comes down to this: one last pressure test.
We want you two to make one of the most challenging and most technical egg dishes anywhere in the entire world.
We want you to make A stunning cheese souffle.
This is the humble egg at its most elevated form.
It takes finesse, skill.
It will show us which one of you truly belongs here and who should be going home.
On your stations, you will find eggs, Flour, butter, white cheddar cheese, salt, and pepper.
You will have just 40 minutes to make us one incredible cheese souffle.
Your 40 minutes starts Now.
Two talented individuals, both very good technicians.
Can they handle the pressure of a souffle? Souffle is intricate, hard.
This is all about the chemistry and the even distribution of those egg whites.
The bechamel is the stability, the foundation.
The butter, the flour, the milk You let it cool down then incorporate your egg yolks.
There's so many things that can go wrong.
How much finesse do you need to have this come out of the oven and not collapse on you? It all depends on how they mix those egg whites.
What's the cook time? You okay? Pretty confident, chef.
What's the cheese? Mixture of parmesan and white cheddar.
Yeah, I honestly thought you and Jaimee would be both on the balcony earlier.
You started as a team, and now you're both head-to-head.
Can't be angry about it.
Can't be pissed.
You just gotta do the best job you can.
Jaimee is incredibly competent, and so am I.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.
- How we doing, Jaimee? - Good, chef.
This is almost making, like, a mornay sauce, where you're dissolving the cheese in the bechamel.
- My cheese is not dissolving.
- I know, I know.
Looks like you're making an omelet.
You got to find a way to get it warm, get that melted.
Double boiler.
Less than 20 minutes.
You got to get these going in in a bit.
Come on, cheese.
Jaimee's bechamel got too cold.
The cheese is not dissolving.
It's like a big bowl of eggy mass With cheese in it, so now she's trying To mix it again and warm it up.
Daniel's bechamel looks very runny.
I think he's added too much milk.
- And it'll never rise.
- Right.
Be too heavy for the egg whites.
It's gonna make a souffle soup.
Right now, we're on course for a disaster.
If you both don't get your souffles in the oven in the next two minutes, both of you will be going home.
I beg you to get a souffle in the bloody oven.
Jaimee's are in.
And 30 seconds behind her, Daniel put two in as well.
Right now it's all in the fate of the ovens.
Two minutes to go.
Which one are you taking out? The one on the right, 'cause it's cleaner.
It's not about the cleanest one.
It's about the best-tasting one.
They should taste the same.
Have a look at Daniel's.
Have a look at Jaimee's.
Oh, those look good too.
This is gonna be a close one.
Oh, my god.
It's gorgeous! - Ten, nine - They look exactly the same.
eight, seven, six, five, four Oh, my god.
three two, one.
Hands in the air.
Well done.
Let's go.
Knowing that my life depends on a cheese souffle right now, it's so scary.
This is $1/4 million souffle.
My heart is pounding.
They look almost identical.
They've both risen about the same.
They have nearly the same color, very close on consistency.
It's gonna have to come down to taste.
Are you okay? I got nervous.
All right, Jaimee, Daniel, give us a minute, please.
I think that they both have their pluses and minuses.
Jaimee's is not brilliant.
The souffle, that's so in Jaimee's wheelhouse.
She's gonna have the edge over Daniel.
Daniel was generous with the cheese and the flavors.
I thought Daniel's souffle looked the best.
I had watched him during the whole process.
He had been seasoning it good and tasting it as he went.
I'm really thinking Daniel's got this one.
Four challenges in one night.
Boy, have you two been put through your paces.
Well done.
Two very gallant attempts.
Jaimee, your souffle, great crust on the outside, beautiful seasoning.
On the whole, it tasted good.
But insufficient bechamel and too much egg white.
Could have done with a bit more cheese.
Daniel, beautiful crust.
Little bit of nutmeg in there.
Good flavor.
The bechamel beyond belief.
The issue we had: Too salty.
Both of you did an amazing job.
One person is leaving this competition, and one is joining everybody else on the balcony.
The person that made the best souffle Jaimee Vitolo.
Well done.
Please say good night to Daniel.
Oh, Daniel, tough one, that, buddy.
I think what we admire more about you is the sacrifices.
Love the passion.
But you quit your job to come into this competition.
Sure did.
What do you want to do next? I'm gonna open a little bar that serves really awesome plates, has some amazing beer on tap, and has some of the best japanese arcade games in the world.
I think it's ironic what really probably sets you apart is not staying within the lines.
And I think sometimes that hurts you in this competition.
But I like that about you, and when you open up that bar, never lose that attitude.
Never conform to the establishment.
And I'll bring Graham, and I'll buy the beers.
Deal.
Come say good-bye, man.
Good luck.
- Thanks, man.
- Good job, brother.
Thank you, Daniel.
I feel devastated, but it's not the end.
I liked everything about this dish.
- Good job.
- Thank you, sir.
I made tremendous sacrifices, but I'm proud of myself for taking a chance, you know? My whole life, I've been afraid to really gamble.
You, sir, are a beast with the sugar and yeast.
MasterChef is the push and the motivation I need to start taking more chances.
The red team, ladies and gentlemen! On to bigger things.
I can't wait to see what's next.
Next week Switch! A chaotic tag team challenge Get your pot stickers on the pan.
has the home cooks on the run.
Push it! Let's do this! Go, go, go! Who will win the race Set your partner up for success.
Way to go! and who will fall short of the finish line? Ah! It's breaking on me.
Man, come on, willie! Let's go! find out next time - Get them on the tray! - Three on MasterChef.
- Two - Lids on! one.
Is she okay? I'm okay.
I'm fine.
So far 15 home cooks Francis, Ahran, Christine.
have left the kitchen.
I'm sorry, your journey ends tonight.
And last week, Daniel became the latest Never lose that attitude.
to see his MasterChef dream disapear.
Tonight, emotional words from home Who's the letter from? It's from my mom.
brings the home cooks together Switch! for a frenetic tag team challenge Get your pot stickers on the pan.
which has the home cooks on the run.
- Push it! - Let's do this! Go, go, go! Who will win the race? Set your partner up for success.
Way to go! And who will fall short of the finish line? It's breaking on me.
Man, come on, Willie! Go! Find out right now - Get them on the tray! - Three on MasterChef.
- Two.
- Lids on! One.
Is she okay? You walk into the kitchen, and it feels bigger because there's less people in it.
Welcome, guys.
Come on down.
Walking into the MasterChef kitchen today It's a bittersweet moment.
Honestly, I'm missing all my family.
However, I'm excited, because I'm still here, and that even gives me a chance to even become better.
Welcome back, everyone.
There are just seven of you left in this competition.
You beat out thousands of other home cooks to get into the kitchen, and you are still here standing.
That journey continues now with your next mystery box challenge.
Before we find out what's under your mystery boxes, we have a small surprise in store.
In each of your drawers, you will find something to remind you why you are here.
Open up your drawers at your station.
Oh.
I open the drawer, and I see a letter from my husband, Ross.
"Hi, sweetie.
I've been thinking about you.
A lot.
No, a ton.
" This letter's from my mom.
She is the reason why I'm here.
"Courtney, I am so, so proud of you and not one bit surprised.
Your never-give-up attitude has worked for you in everything you have done, and your grateful and thoughtful heart to go along with that is such a blessing.
" "Cutter, this is a big challenge, but I know you will see this through to the end.
Take this time to live with a calm spirit, because at this point, you're already a winner.
can't wait for a big ol' bear hug.
Dad.
" "We miss your food in the morning and your complaining at night, but we are not ready for you to come home.
We know you can win.
It is your turn to shine, so shine like a diamond the diamond you are.
" "I am so proud of you.
remember what I've always told you Your attitude determines your altitude.
Love, grandma.
" This is my boost that I needed to win this competition.
With home on your mind and in your hearts, it's time to find out what is under your mystery boxes.
Are you ready? - Yes, chef.
- Yes, sir.
One Two Three, Lift.
Whoa! Nothing says "home" in this country like the humble apple.
The first thing that pops into my mind is apple pie.
It's the most american thing.
And it's, like, the best food ever.
Maybe not apple pie.
Apple crisp.
Or maybe not apple crisp.
Maybe a apple tart.
I make a mean-ass cinnamon apple cookie.
You'll each have 60 minutes to make us a stunning apple dish using those apples and whatever other ingredients you want from a limited pantry.
Show us your journey.
Prove how far you've come in this competition tonight.
The only thing you can't do is Dessert.
That's right.
You cannot make us a dessert.
I'm like, "What? No dessert? Damn.
" Now, everybody ready? Yes, chef.
Your 60 minutes starts Now.
My passion is in baking, so when they tell us to do a savory dish, I don't know what to do.
I need to channel my grandma.
That's all I can do at this point.
I know exactly what I want to do.
So I go and grab the philips air fryer.
I've used it back at home, and I know that it's gonna cook my dish perfectly, and I know that it's gonna keep it exactly the way I want it without using a lot of oil and without losing a lot of moisture.
Apples.
Now, they were excited for a split second thinking they were gonna go down that dessert route.
- Oh, dessert would be too easy.
- Too easy.
At this point, seven left, we can expect high-level restaurant dishes with apples today.
A mystery box is always based on creativity.
It's your time to shine.
And now, with apples as a savory dish, we should see that.
Apples, apples, apples.
Everything is turning up apples.
When I got those letters, it really took me back home.
My passion for food comes from my grandmother.
His mama got her skills from me.
At sundays we have big family meal.
We cook.
We share stories.
And that's just something that is rewarding.
Today I'm going to make a pork tenderloin.
And I'm gonna make a stuffing-stuffed mushroom.
My grandma only eats pork chops.
So this is the Loretta special.
It's game time, man.
I mean, it's only seven of us left.
My dad and my mom sent me a letter, and it's influencing because me and my dad duck hunt and bird hunt, so I'm gonna do a wild rice and apple-stuffed squab with a butter and apple cider vinegar reduction with some sugared apple crisp chips in the philips air fryer.
I'm used to being away, but I like You know, I kind of I miss the comforts of home.
Right, Courtney.
How you feeling? I'm feeling really good.
How homesick are you? I've never felt homesickness Until I've been here.
What's the one thing you miss most? Being with my family.
Seeing my little brother.
He's six years old.
Wow, and you haven't seen him for a while? I haven't seen him in almost a year.
You must be a big influence in his life.
I want to share this with him so much.
This is a huge event, and this is the chance for me to kind of change my life.
What's the dish? I'm making a apple, prosciutto, and cheese-stuffed pork tenderloin crusted in the peel of the Granny Smith apple.
Why the peel? I wanted to be able to use the whole apple.
Good luck.
Thank you, chef.
Hello, Elizabeth.
What are you making? I'm making savory apple, pork, and cheddar hand pies in a flaky sage pie crust.
I've never seen a hand pie on a menu.
- Do you serve hand pies in your restaurants? - I do not, no.
So you're going into uncharted waters.
Yes.
So you only use Granny Smith across the whole dish? - I just use Granny Smith.
- How come? Honestly, Granny Smith, to me, they just hold up best in savory preparations.
Good luck.
Thank you, chef.
Leslie, what's the dish? I'm making a stuffed pork tenderloin with apples, cheese, wrapped in bacon.
What an amazing lady Paula sounds.
She is an amazing lady.
That's why I married her.
Come on, what woman has seven kids, let alone a dynamite husband like me? You are right.
You damn right.
You is a dynamite.
Are you listening, Christian? Yeah, I'm hearing him.
You want some apples? No, thank you.
Oh, delish.
What did you have for breakfast this morning? - What I always eat for breakfast: Oatmeal.
- Oatmeal.
Keeps me regular.
Leslie! Keeps me regular, my brother.
Hey, mr.
Viagra, That's all right.
As long as my meat's cooking, I'm happy.
That's what she said.
Whoa.
- Christian.
- Yes, sir.
So you got a letter from who? From your fiancee? - From my fiancee, yes.
- Does she miss you? - Definitely, hands down.
- Does she miss you or your cooking more? She miss both, me and my cooking.
You cook for her every day? - Yes, I do.
- What are you making? I'm gonna make a stuffed pork chop.
What'd you stuff in there? Bread crumbs, celery, carrots, apples.
- Hands down, it looks legit.
- Thank you.
What other apples are you using Red Delicious? Yeah, I'm gonna throw those with the vegetables that I got over here brussels sprouts, zucchini.
- Can't wait to taste that pork chop.
- Thank you.
Looks great.
So a lot of great smells out there.
It smells and looks incredible.
I think we're really getting, like, a taste of home.
I mean, certainly some of these cooks were inspired by those letters.
Absolutely.
They're cooking dishes that remind them of home.
And we're gonna get some good food today.
Leslie, he is in the zone.
He has a delicious caramelized tenderloin of pork.
Wrapping it in some smoked bacon.
Nice.
Stuffing it with apples.
- He's on it, big-time.
- Yeah.
Christian's stuffed pork chop looks awesome.
Elizabeth's sounds like a appetizer.
She has, like, some sauces that are really good flavors.
I just I think hand pie might not be a great strategy.
What about Courtney? Nice taste and sort of quite intriguing.
But she's got that acidity right between the sweetness and the sourness of the apples.
One minute remaining.
Come on, cook.
Let's go, guys.
We want to see beautiful plates.
Remember, there is a huge advantage for tonight's mystery box winner.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
and stop.
Hands in the air.
MasterChef season four winner Luca manfe's cookbook, My Italian kitchen, brings you his very best family recipes with the warm, rustic flavors of Italy.
Order today at fox.
com Or wherever books are sold.
Let's go, guys.
We want to see beautiful plates.
Five, four, three, two, one.
and stop.
Hands in the air.
Throughout the mystery box challenge, the judges taste elements of all the home cooks' dishes as they come together.
They now take one last look to choose the top three standouts.
And the winner of this challenge will receive a major advantage in the next round.
The first dish smartly used the apples with the pork.
The plate looks beautiful.
Please step forward Christian.
Tsh, word.
Christian's dish looks like a really big piece of meat.
I'm curious if it's cooked all the way through.
Wow.
Describe the dish, please.
This is a stuffed pork chop.
In the stuffing, there's celery, carrots, onions, diced apples.
On the bottom, you have seared zucchini, brussels sprouts, bacon, and also red apples.
Visually, it looks stunning.
Thank you.
My concern is, when you cook a double pork chop, it's hard enough.
Yes.
Stuffing it, ten times harder.
Are you confident that it's cooked in the middle? I'm confident that it's cooked in the middle.
Wow, yeah.
That looks moist.
You've nailed it.
What did you season the pork with inside? A little cinnamon, salt and pepper, and a little cajun seasoning.
Why cajun? Bringing it back to New Orleans.
That pork's delicious.
Cooked it beautifully.
Thank you.
Well done.
Now, apple.
Got some in the little saute here.
Also a apple filling on top as well.
I mean, this look like a restaurant dish, and it shows the arc of your journey, where you're at now.
I'm excited to see what else you can bring.
- Thank you, chef.
- Good job.
Double cut pork chop perfectly cooked is not easy to do.
I got to say, you consistently impress me.
Just the minute I'm ready to write you off, You come back with a dish like this.
- Formidable.
- Thank you.
The second dish that we'd like to examine further really incorporated the apple in a smart way.
They also used the pork.
Please step forward Leslie.
Leslie is really putting out some amazing dishes.
He's really somebody to look at as far as winning the whole competition.
All right, Leslie, tell me what we have.
A stuffed pork tenderloin with honeycrisp apples, gruyere cheese, wrapped in bacon, and a side of apple mashed potatoes.
That's perfectly seasoned.
Great balance.
Sweet, sour, saltiness from the bacon.
What's the mash underneath? That's fingerling potatoes.
Run 'em through a ricer with some apple in it.
So it's like an apple-potato mash.
Yes, it's an apple-potato mash.
Then you got apple going through the pork.
Yes.
I think it shows a lot of technique and your journey and everything that you've been learning so far.
- Thank you very much.
- It's been fun to see.
- Leslie.
- Yes.
Who would have thought one little letter like that from your dear lady, that would put a spark up your ass? Yeah, she can usually light my fire.
Listen, at the beginning of this competition, you were like the appendix.
Everybody wanted you out.
Continue cooking dishes like this, and it'll be hard to put you down.
Well done.
- Thank you, chef.
- Thank you.
The third dish that we want to take a closer look at this dish had bold flavors.
A lot of technique shined in this dish.
It was quite aesthetically beautiful as well.
Please step forward Courtney.
Yes.
If Courtney wins this mystery box challenge, I'm going to stab kittens, because I can't take it anymore.
Explain your dish to me.
It is a pork tenderloin stuffed with apple, pancetta, and swiss chard with pink lady apple jus sauce at the bottom and then sliced raw apple and celeriac salad on the side.
So you used apple in, like In every component.
Like, every like, six, seven ways? Yep.
Wow.
This is a smart dish, because you used not just the sweetness of the apple but also the acidity.
Thank you.
Every time we raise the stakes, you double down.
Getting better and better.
Thank you.
What was the inspiration for this? Something that you've cooked for your mom or your little brother? I just thought of back at home and the apple orchards that are all around where I live and the things we would find at the farmers' market.
Technique is there.
The cookery, the colors This is you at your best right now.
You're just getting better and better.
- Good job.
- Thank you, chef.
Three amazing dishes.
As we know, only one can be the winner.
The person who is going to join us in the pantry and get a huge advantage in the upcoming elimination challenge The home cook with the winning mystery box dish is Three amazing dishes.
The winning home cook The person who is going to join us in the pantry and get a huge advantage in the upcoming elimination challenge Is Courtney.
Congratulations.
Amazing technique, plating.
Great job.
Thank you, chef.
Congratulations.
Let's go.
Well done.
Courtney is now in control of the elimination test, where at least one person will leave the competition.
Courtney, things are gonna work somewhat differently tonight.
You don't get to choose what everyone will have to cook, but you alone will be making pivotal decisions that could get your toughest competition sent home.
Ready to see what everyone's gonna be cooking in tonight's elimination challenge? Yes, chef.
Dim sum.
Small edible treasures bursting with flavor.
It's something that families love.
Comforting, delicious, and very, very challenging to make.
You have har gow, which are shrimp dumplings in a rice wrapper.
Shumai, shrimp and pork dumplings.
Steamed buns with delicious short rib inside them.
Cabbage roll with minced pork in it.
And pot stickers, dumplings filled with vegetables.
For your first advantage, because you won the mystery box challenge, you will not have to cook in tonight's elimination challenge.
Now, you know your competitors are gonna have to cook all this dim sum.
Imagine how hard it would be to do it with somebody that you don't work well with.
You see where we're going? Oh, yeah.
The remaining six cooks out there tonight are gonna have to replicate all this delicious dim sum in pairs.
- Awesome.
- And guess what.
The person picking those teams is Me.
I'm definitely nervous about Courtney having the advantage in this challenge because I think that she definitely has her sights set on me and will probably try to target me in some way.
Back in the pantry, Courtney did not get to choose what kind of food all of you will be cooking.
We did that for her.
It's dim sum.
Every one of these dishes are so intricate and so technical to make.
The fillings in each and every one of them have to be flavorful and perfectly balanced.
Honestly, all of you, it is nearly impossible to pull off alone.
But don't worry, because You'll be in teams of two.
And Courtney chose the teams.
I want to be on Christian's team because he's also been known as his flavor profiles, and I could see us really working well together.
Courtney, we want to know who you will be pairing with Christian.
Christian is a very fast-paced and efficient cook, so I'm going to partner him with somebody that moves at a different pace.
Big Willie.
Oh, Big Willie, Go join Christian.
How do you guys feel? - I'm excited.
- I'm good.
Wow.
Next team.
Cutter.
Courtney, tell us what you're thinking.
I know that there's a lot of intricacy needed for dim sum, and sometimes Cutter has a difficult time with that.
so I want to put him with somebody that might have to help him along the way.
I'm putting him with Elizabeth.
Hell yeah.
The last thing I want is to reveal any sort of weakness to Courtney, so I'm just like, "Yeah, of course I want to be with Cutter.
" Like, "Fine.
" Elizabeth, how are you feeling? I feel great.
You know, Cutter and I don't agree on much, but we do agree on one very important thing, which is that we want Courtney to go away.
So we're gonna work very hard today.
And finally, the team that got picked by default, Leslie and Jaimee.
My new friend.
Leslie, how are you feeling? I'm feeling great.
She's got perfect fingers for making dim sum.
There is, however, one more twist in tonight's challenge.
You may be working as a team, but you won't be working together at the same time.
Tonight's challenge is the formidable tag team challenge.
One of you will cook first, and when we shout, "Switch," you will trade positions instantly.
Now, before you head back to your stations, I'd like all of you to come up and have a little taste of these amazing dim sums.
We don't have any dim sum in Beaumont, but I went to Hong Kong when I was in the navy.
I've never really made it, but I've eaten them enough that I can hopefully pull this off.
I've tried making dim sum, but it's a lot easier to just go to the Chinese restaurant.
All of you please head back to your stations.
Every ingredient and every tool that you need to create this incredible dim sum tray has been placed on your stations behind you.
At least one of you is going home today.
Maybe an entire team.
Everyone ready? Yes, chef.
Your 60 minutes starts Now.
Get the pressure cooker hot, okay? Pork belly first or the short rib first? Short rib first.
Season that meat with salt, pepper, garlic.
Don't put too much salt.
You don't want it too salty.
A lot of these people have never even had dim sum.
Where do you even begin? Move it.
Let's go.
Come on.
First of all, short ribs on.
Put them in the pan straightaway.
Get that good sear on every side.
After that, you got to blanch your cabbage.
The cabbage rolls are also very difficult, because the cabbage is fibrous.
- Yeah.
- It has to steam for a while.
The biggest thing you got to do is slice out some of that rib so that it rolls easier.
The pot stickers, you know, we're cooking twice.
You're steaming, then frying them.
The shumai take ten minutes to steam, so they got to be in.
Got about one more minute and we can start putting liquids in.
Okay, perfect.
Communication is key.
Got to work and talk at the same time.
The minute they're silent, they're in trouble.
Leslie, you have to tell me what you're doing.
Say what? Let's go.
You got Move that knife faster than that let's go.
I'm just gonna put it all in one bowl for now.
No, no, no, I think we need to start separating the proteins Right now.
Don't throw all of that, 'cause that's a lot.
I would use it all.
Trust me.
The vulnerable pair for me tonight Oh, my god.
Jaimee and Leslie, it's like oil and water.
I have never felt so stressed out in my life.
Come on, let's go.
Set your partner up for success.
Come on.
- Leslie.
- Yes.
Worry about that later.
Just get those burners on.
The burners are on.
- Well, then move on.
- You guys should stop arguing and cook.
Oh, my god, I can't You spend more time yelling at each other Than you do cooking.
Ten seconds till we switch.
What would you like me to do? Finish doing the prep work.
Switch! Quickly.
Go.
Go.
Go.
Let's go.
Come on.
What the hell happened over here? Well, you got the vegetables right there.
Finish off the vegetable.
Oh, god.
I don't know what's going on here at all.
- You got pork in there.
- Yeah.
Where's the vegetable dumpling? He said it had to be pork in there too.
That makes no sense.
I could have sworn it was just vegetable.
Well, then we will do it however you want.
That's fine.
Let's just Because you already screwed it anyway.
Stop pointing fingers.
Just cut.
Switch! In this tag team challenge, the home cooks are cooking an array of complex dim sum dishes for the right to stay in the MasterChef kitchen.
I thought that that dumpling was just a vegetable dumpling.
I don't know what to do.
Jaimee's given up.
Thanks, Courtney.
This is a fine mess you've created.
Yeah, I know.
Let's just regroup and figure out what we got to do.
But I could have sworn it was a vegetable dumpling.
One minute until the next switch.
What do you need me to do when I get in? We just need to finish the vegetables, and we need to go ahead and get the wok started.
Okay.
until the next switch.
Push it, Christian! You just threw the rest of the carrots out that I need to finish the vegetables.
Well, then there's no carrots.
Switch! Quickly.
Go.
Get in there.
Go.
Let's go.
Come on.
Come on, boy.
Let's go.
So just keep cooking it.
- How's this going? - Pretty well.
I got to jump in, finish the vegetable pot sticker filling, and then I'm gonna jump over and finish seasoning all our proteins.
Okay, and then you got that all set for him to start filling in the next one? - Yes.
Yes.
- Okay.
Working in advertising helps me work really well under pressure, so I'm not worried about this challenge.
Cutter, grab that napa cabbage and cut the butt off.
I feel like I'm the person that can bring it all together in the end and get everything on the plate.
And then just leave the leaves whole.
Yeah.
Perfect.
Thank you.
Throw that away.
Make sure you trim the stems.
- Let me just do what I do.
- Okay.
I won't talk.
Okay, thank you.
- You gonna make it? - No.
He just basically asked me to stop talking - Stop talking.
- So he can do what he has to do.
But the whole point of this thing is, you have to communicate.
I realize that.
In one minute, we're swapping again.
Let's go, Leslie.
Come on.
My hands are going as fast as I can.
I'm looking good over here on these pot stickers.
They better look good.
I'm looking at one right now that's not sealed.
Pinch 'em together, man.
Let's go.
Too much egg wash.
You're doing too much egg wash.
Let's go! What's that for, the pot stickers? - Yes.
- Don't steam 'em now.
- I don't want 'em steamed.
- I'm not steaming 'em.
He's lost.
It's hard for me to work in this environment.
What you doing now? Come on, Willie.
I don't like to be yelled at.
And Christian's way of communicating is yelling.
What you doing? I'm getting the pot ready.
Let's go, then.
Man, come on, Willie! Ten seconds till we switch.
You hear that? Ten seconds, man.
Let's go.
Okay, ten seconds, Cutter.
Get ready.
Get ready.
- Ready? - No.
Switch, everybody! Let's go.
- You okay? - Yeah.
- Huh? - My mouth is dry, like - I know.
I know.
I know.
- I'm okay.
I'm okay.
Look at me.
Lips are white as anything.
I'm okay.
Sit down.
Sit down.
Sit down.
- You okay? - Yeah.
You just shut down there.
I just don't like a lot of yelling and stuff, so I got to get used to that.
Sometimes you have to get your voice across.
- Don't let me down.
- Okay.
- Come on.
- Yes, chef.
Come on.
Come on.
Come on.
I'm feeling for big Willie because he's really, really struggling.
I think this challenge is just too far outside of his comfort zone.
Sorry about that, Christian.
It's all right.
Come on, man.
So what did you just get done? Okay, the pot stickers are ready to go.
- Okay.
- Cabbage is ready for her to season.
- Okay.
- All we've got left to do is press out the shrimp.
- The har gow? - The har gow.
- Okay.
And then she needs to check her beef whenever she gets a chance.
All right, so you've got a real plan, okay.
Two minutes till we switch.
Jaimee, that low burner's no good.
- Move that pot.
- Move what one? The pot, the back pot.
This one? - Yes, that's a bigger burner.
- Okay.
Look at the size of the burner.
Good lord.
All right, Leslie, what the hell is going on here? Nothing.
We're doing fine.
She's taking care of the pot stickers right now.
She's gonna do the dumplings.
Jaimee, make sure you don't put too much of the stuffing in there.
- I can do those.
- Okay.
Guys, less than ten seconds till we switch.
I'll just go ahead and start getting the cabbage rolls filled.
Okay.
This is your party right here.
Switch! Now! Done! I got it.
It's okay.
It's just really wet.
Come on, Willie.
Roll, baby, roll.
You can use that for the cabbage as well, okay? No? Okay.
There might be a little chance that Jaimee and Leslie don't get any food on the plate.
They don't really communicate well.
Leslie's a one-man band.
Okay, okay, do the shumai.
- Okay.
- Yeah, there you go.
Fill it up.
Look at Cutter's big, fat, sausage fingers.
And he's actually going a good job on those shumai.
I never thought There you go.
Willie, take two of those pot stickers, put it on one side, and take the rest and put it on the opposite side.
I got you.
Big Willie's kind of regained his composure.
He's back.
We're looking good.
- We're looking good.
- Good job, Willie.
We're not gonna get the steam buns.
Stop saying that.
When Gordon tells you to switch, that will be your last switch.
Oh, my god.
It's breaking on me.
Don't freak out.
Just egg wash it.
Come on, Leslie.
Get steaming.
Come on, finish those off for me.
Not coming out right, man.
They're not round.
Ten seconds till we switch.
Set your partner up for success.
- Do you want to go home, Willie? - Nope.
Show me you don't want to go home.
Three, two, one.
Switch! Let's go.
Last one.
- Go, go, go, go! - Last switch.
Let's go.
Let's do this, Jaimee.
Let's go, Elizabeth.
Get the meat shredded.
Hey, Christian, are you happy with the cook on that braise? - Hell, no.
- Okay, well, put it back in.
- Get it back on the fire.
- Put it back in.
Final push.
Come on, Jaimee, dig in.
Just get the meat in it.
Just get the meat in it.
Get your pot stickers on the pan.
Get your pot stickers on the pan.
Let's go, guys.
Two minutes left.
Nice, Jaimee.
Keep up the good work.
Come on.
Come get these shumai right here.
Oh! Come on, Christian.
Come on.
Put it in the middle.
Put it in the middle.
Come on, Jaimee, you got one minute left.
Get these buns! Let's go.
Jaimee, get them on the tray.
Let's go, girl.
Let's do this! Come on, put it on there.
Put it on there.
- 30 seconds to go! - Go, go, go, go, go, go, go! Is she okay? I'm okay! I'm fine.
Lids on! Put the lids on! Christian, these lids! Get your lid on! Lids on, Jaimee! Lids on! Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four Lids on! Three, two, one, stop! Hands in the air.
Whoo! Let's do this, Jaimee.
- Let's go.
- Get them on the tray! Put 'em in there.
Put 'em in there.
Put 'em in there.
Lids on, Jaimee! Lids on! Christian, these lids! Five, four Leave it alone, Elizabeth.
- These lids! - Lids on! Three, two, one, stop! Hands in the air.
Whoo! Way to go! Well done.
Good job, boy.
I'm gonna cry.
Tonight, six of you entered this challenge.
Soon there'll be one less home cook, 'cause after tonight, at least one of you will be leaving this competition.
Let's start off with Jaimee and Leslie.
Let's go.
This is going to be so hard to watch, because everything that happened with Leslie and Jaimee over the past 60 minutes was a disaster.
Okay.
I saw and witnessed pandemonium.
What in the hell happened? You know, at just times we broke down and lost communication and started screaming and yelling, you know? And you can't do that.
Sorry.
Visually, they look good.
They look very good, despite the animosity.
I am frickin' amazed.
The actual rib's shredded beautifully.
Short rib's really delicious.
And the pot stickers Taste quite nice.
The tray could have been a near perfect tray Had you two focused on each other.
Yes.
How long did you steam the cabbage rolls? - I want to say a good ten minutes.
- Yeah.
You think they're cooked all the way through? I would like to think so.
Pray to god.
Good job on the cabbage.
Thank you.
I was expecting, with the kind of discord that you guys had between you, to have dim sum that was more reflective of that animosity.
Instead, they seem to be very harmonious in their aesthetic.
The flavor's good.
I'm pleasantly surprised.
Thank you.
Despite our roller coaster of differences, we wound up pulling it together in the end.
So now, at this point, I'm just hoping that Cutter, you know, with his big texas hands and Willie with those little chubby fingers of his, you know, can't roll dumplings.
Okay, next up, please, Christian and Big Willie.
Watching you guys you've got finesse.
I've seen you make beautiful tiny little things.
You coaching kind of like a cheerleader.
I was getting inspired by watching you run.
And then this is what we get.
I just expected there to be more finesse and touch, I guess, with these.
What do you see? Psh, I burnt one of my pot stickers.
The dough on the har gow too thick.
Steaming is a slow process.
It's a moist cooking method.
And it appears much easier than it actually is.
I mean, the temp that you cooked these, they become like rubber balls.
Wow.
I mean, no sauce, no garnish.
Look at that.
You guys are better than that.
It's just sad.
Who seasoned the cabbage? - I did.
- Mm-hmm.
Take a bite, please.
And then pass the other end to Big Willie.
What's the first thing that that needs? - Seasoning.
- Seasoning.
Disgusting.
Willie, flavor profile, nowhere to be seen tonight.
Are you serious about winning this competition? I am serious.
I think I've performed tremendously as far as the roll, the tightness, having big fingers and getting this stuff done.
Based on this performance, you both don't deserve to be in this competition.
Elizabeth and Cutter.
This is, without question, the worst thing I've brought to the judges in the MasterChef kitchen, and I'm feeling terrible, and I'm dreading him opening the boxes.
It looks horrendous.
Those buns? That looks like a basket full of canned dog food.
It doesn't look appetizing.
Everything's oversized, clumsy, and just badly thought-out.
Even the pot stickers.
Look, there's hardly any filling in there.
It's all greasy.
Who filled them? I started filling 'em, and she closed 'em up.
Lack of seasoning.
Nothing in there.
And the pork and cabbage rolls The size of that.
Way too much cabbage.
And look.
I saw those.
I knew they looked horrible.
- And I should never have put them in.
- No.
I am so confused, because how can a pairing that was great with the communication produce something so bad? I have no idea.
I didn't realize it was that bad.
What a shame.
This, quite frankly, is very disappointing.
I mean, look at this.
Courtney put you here to sink Elizabeth.
You could sink her with the size of these cabbage rolls.
I don't even want to eat this.
Who did this meat like this? I cooked it.
She cut it.
Well, if you cooked it right, she wouldn't need to cut it, because you could spoon it apart.
I don't know what went wrong.
I really don't.
It's very rare when we see a direct strike in one of these advantages hit so hard, Elizabeth.
You are in a very, very vulnerable position right now.
Are you the next MasterChef? We'll be coming to a city near you soon.
Go to fox.
com and apply for season six now.
It's very rare when we see a direct strike in one of these advantages hit so hard, Elizabeth.
You are in a very, very vulnerable position right now.
Going home in one of Courtney's craftily strategized plots is the worst possible thing I could think of.
Not to mention we're so close to being top five.
Let's get one thing right.
Tonight was a very tough challenge.
You know damn well, at this stage of the competition, it's never gonna be easy.
The winning team, against all odds and despite their performance but the team that we felt put together the best tray of dim sum Congratulations, Leslie and Jaimee.
Go go to the balcony.
Good job.
Thank you.
Elizabeth and Cutter.
Throughout the whole you looked like you were really owning this challenge.
However, the final results were so underwhelming.
The whole tray lacked finesse.
Christian and Willie.
Team spirit fragmented.
Coached by Christian.
Christian continued to make mistakes.
Big Willie in a tizz.
Courtney mentioned putting you two together would screw both of you up.
One was ultrafast.
One was ultraslow.
She was absolutely right.
The team safe from elimination tonight By a fraction of a hair Cutter and Elizabeth.
You are safe from elimination.
Join Courtney, Leslie, and Jaimee on the balcony.
Christian and Willie, please, both of you, step round to the front.
Two of you on the losing team.
Both contributed heavily to the loss.
At least one of you will be leaving this competition shortly.
It's a tough decision.
Here we got one vocal, ambitious, rough-around-the-edges amateur cook in Christian that gives it his all against a passionate, kind-hearted gourmet that has a flavor profile beyond belief.
This is very, very difficult.
The person leaving MasterChef tonight That person is Willie.
I'm sorry.
Your journey ends tonight in the MasterChef kitchen.
Please say good night to Christian.
Give me a hug, dude.
No hard feelings.
Big Willie, every time you cooked, you showed the love, and you put that love on the plate.
Tonight was the first time that I didn't taste the love.
Willie, you got a heart as big as Texas.
and I think that you have a natural ability Sweet, savory, everything in between and you know that you belong in a kitchen.
Thank you.
Come say good-bye, bud.
- Be well.
- Thank you.
Good job, bud.
Thank you.
Oh, thank you.
Turn around, big man.
All right, Big Willie.
Who's gonna win MasterChef? I've always said this, and I still believe in it.
And I think Christian is gonna take it home.
Wow.
Please put your apron on your bench.
Have a safe trip home.
Good night, sir.
Love you, Big Willie.
You know what, America? Yes, y'all are going to miss all of this.
Yes, it's not gonna be as bright in the kitchen.
But I was able to do some amazing things.
Big Willie.
Yeah! Well done, big man.
I've always been passionate about food Ooh, that is good.
As far as eating it and cooking it.
That is amazing.
It's a party in my mouth, Willie.
Good job.
Thanks, chef.
But this experience has really taken my passion for food to another level.
It's moist, pretty near perfect.
I think, more than anything, you've put your heart and soul on the plate.
Yeah! Aah! You're exactly what we're looking for here in the MasterChef kitchen.
Oh! And, in the words of my fantabulous grandmother, "Your attitude will always determine your altitude.
" Next week I need you to look at me! Tempers erupt You need to chill out.
Quit doing everything.
as the home cooks take over an iconic a-list restaurant.
We are about to get our asses handed to us.
Let's go.
Yes, chef.
I am terrified.
Whoa! And the heat of the kitchen I hope you're joking.
serves up MasterChef's biggest-ever meltdown.
I know how to run a restaurant.
All you're doing is yelling at me.
- He won't listen to me.
- You two.
You two, come here.
- Shut up.
- You two! Come here! 
Last week, we said an emotional good-bye Tonight was the first time that I didn't taste the love.
to one of the biggest home cooks in the MasterChef kitchen.
Willie, please put your apron on your bench and say good night.
Tonight the home cooks take over an A-list restaurant.
We are about to get our asses handed to us - Let's go.
- Yes, chef.
And I am terrified.
And it isn't long - I hope you're joking.
before the heat of the kitchen I need you to look at me! You need to chill out.
Quit doing everything.
ignites an explosive meltdown.
I know how to run a restaurant.
All you're doing is yelling at me.
He won't listen to me.
Shut up.
You two! Come here.
The final six home cooks are walking the Sunset Strip in Hollywood, California, where tonight, their culinary skills will be put to the test at the legendary rock and roll Sunset Marquis hotel.
Going into the Sunset Marquis, I just feel like royalty.
I mean, rock and roll royalty.
You can see all the pictures on the wall of all the rock stars that have been there.
Dylan, Springsteen, U2.
And we go by this pool, and of course, there's the california hotties sitting out on the water.
This big ol' country boy don't see stuff like that in Texas.
I can't believe that I made it to the top six.
I would love to open my own bar or bakery one day, and I'm here to show myself that I can do whatever I put my mind to.
Welcome, everybody, to the Cavatina restaurant at the Sunset Marquis hotel.
This hotel is steeped in history.
Since the birth of rock and roll, if a killer band or artist comes to Hollywood, they stay here.
So do you have any idea why we brought you here? This is the MasterChef restaurant takeover.
Yes.
In this challenge, you talented six home cooks will be taking the reins here at one of the finest restaurants in the country.
I knew it was coming eventually, but, oh, here? At this place? This is, like, elite of the elite.
Now, Graham and I have restaurants.
We know what it takes to run a restaurant.
In fact, Joe isn't here tonight because he is taking care of critical restaurant business of his own as we speak.
Okay, it's time to pick the teams.
Jaimee and Leslie, since you both were on the winning team in that amazing tag team dim sum challenge, you will both be team captains tonight.
Both of you, please, come and stand over by me.
Thank you.
The last time I was a team captain, it was a nightmare, so going into this I want to make sure I'm a winner tonight, so there's gonna be nothing stopping me.
Jaimee, because you have been on the winning side of more team challenges, you get to pick first.
I do not want to be a team leader in this situation, so I need somebody strong who will not be scared at all of the situation.
This person I know is going to thrive in this environment.
Christian, I need you.
Thank you.
Jaimee,she's very soft-spoken, but she gonna have to have a voice.
She's gonna have to speak up.
If she don't, we're doomed.
Leslie.
I think this person has shown pizzazz, has outdone pretty much everybody in this whole competition.
- Elizabeth.
- Elizabeth, congratulations.
Thanks, Leslie.
Jaimee, you're picking for both teams.
This person has incredible finesse.
Courtney.
Courtney, come pick up Interesting.
Welcome to the blue team.
Cutter, last pick again.
Please come pick up your apron.
Overall, I think I have a great team.
My only worry is that Cutter's not gonna shut up, because he can be very in your face, and that part I don't appreciate.
Tonight, you guys will be serving over 50 guests.
Now, we'll be talking to all the guests here in the dining room tonight.
We'll listen to what they've got to say, but ultimately, Graham and I will be deciding the winning team.
And you know what happens to the losers.
They'll face the dreaded pressure test.
All of you, let's go.
Michael, how are you, sir? - Welcome, welcome.
- Good to see you.
- Good to have you here.
- Excellent.
Come on in.
Welcome, everybody.
I'd like to introduce to you a very special guest, chef Michael Schlow, who is the chef and owner of Cavatina restaurant here, and he is here to demo the dishes that you will be replicating for his a-list diners.
For service today, the six home cooks will make two appetizers, prince Edward Island mussels and a Parisian gnocchi, then two entrees, a Mediterranean sea bass and a New York strip steak.
So the first dish that we're gonna do today is gonna be the mussel dish.
Start off with a little bit of extra virgin olive oil, some cherry tomatoes, and then about 12 mussels.
Once you put the mussels in, cover the pan, okay, So the mussels open up.
Then we have warm, grilled bread.
That's the first dish.
Nice.
Any normal chef would have weeks to practice and learn these dishes.
We get two minutes.
This is gonna be hard.
So to make the gnocchi, we're gonna be putting a combination of butter, flour, some eggs, in pastry bags.
Take a offset spatula.
Make gnocchi.
Here's how you know they're done.
They'll start to float.
And I want you to dip them into an ice bath, okay? How long do they need to be in the ice water? I would say two minutes.
And this is gonna help to color the gnocchi, okay? Take a little bit of this pecorino sheep's cheese.
They look incredible.
First entree, we're gonna do a bass dish.
We're gonna cook the skin side of the fish first.
Once you see that the skin is starting to crisp on the outside, flip the fish.
So for plating this, quinoa, two pieces per portion, beautiful salad.
Okay, for our last dish, we're going to do a beautiful New York strip steak.
I've already grilled it lightly.
Take a little bit of butter, sear that steak off again.
We're gonna serve that with asparagus and confit ratte potatoes.
Incredible.
Finish it off with a mustard seed chimmichurri.
Wow, nice.
Amazing.
I know that we are about to get our asses handed to us, and I am terrified.
You have one hour to prep and two hours to serve everybody out in that dining room.
There's one more thing.
To help you get through it, there will be somebody expediting tonight.
- The chef who was just here? - No.
Me.
I'll be expediting.
The heat is gonna get real hot in this kitchen.
I'll be making sure that every dish is up to the usual requirements of this restaurant.
Your 60 minutes prep time starts Now.
Both teams must now hastily devise a game plan for tonight's service.
I'm gonna take care of the mussels.
Maybe you can help me with the mushrooms? - I'm searing the steaks.
- All right.
Listen, you make all the faces you want.
I'm making the steaks.
She's gonna be the final plater, 'cause she has the better idea.
Then you need to do the gnocchi.
No.
Listen, do me a favor.
Are you the captain or am I the captain? So, please, stop now.
Stop now.
I'm trying to make this work smoothly though.
- Listen to me.
- I understand.
No, I'm not gonna listen to you, 'cause you're not the captain.
- that's what this is for, okay? - Okay.
See that patch there? It's on my arm.
Doesn't say "team Cutter.
" I'm in charge.
I have the final word.
Let's just get the job done.
Gnocchi, I want you to do.
Are you comfortable with cooking mussels? Yeah.
And I can do all the finishing touches.
I'm gonna try my best to suck it up and do it, but I'm scared.
All right, let's do it.
So this is their first time in a kitchen like this.
I mean, this is Jaimee's chance to reassert herself as that leader in the kitchen.
Leslie gets flustered under pressure.
He starts panicking.
Elizabeth is going to have to come in and calm him down, 'cause if he starts losing it, everybody's gonna.
As both teams race to get their dishes ready for service, blue team captain Jaimee is struggling to find her voice as a leader.
About how long on the asparagus? Come on, Jaimee.
Come on.
Jaimee, you got to move, move.
This is brutal.
Jaimee, come around here a minute.
What's wrong? Come on.
I'm scared [bleep] right now.
- Don't be intimidated.
- Okay.
- Okay.
- Okay? As jaimee tries to find her confidence as captain, red team leader, Leslie, is watching every move his team makes.
You're burning it.
You're burning it.
I got the mushrooms.
I got this.
Leslie, you can't be putting me off of something, okay? I got it.
I got it.
I think Leslie is so egotistical.
"No, no, get out of the way, Cutter.
You're just all in the way.
" - Move, move, move.
- You got it? He's an ex-beautician house bitch that works for his wife, so I think he's trying to, like, prove his manhood or something.
Give me those.
I got it.
I got it, Cutter.
You can't have everything, okay? - Right now, I got it.
- Let me help you.
I am not gonna let what happened the last time happen this time.
I need you for a minute.
Come with me.
I am not losing control of my authority here.
I don't want to hear any excuses.
Just listen and do what I'm asking you to do.
Look,I need you to look at me to make sure I can hear you.
I don't need to look at you.
No, no, I need you to look at me! Talk to me.
Don't holler at me, talk to me.
I need you, I need you to look at me.
Then I know you're listening.
I'm not your kid, okay? First of all, you need to chill out and be a team leader and quit doing everything.
We're a team, okay? - Hey, hey, hey, hey, hey.
- We're a team.
- I told you.
- Okay, okay.
- No,told me [bleep].
- Okay, okay.
- Come here.
Come here.
- [bleep] that [bleep].
This is embarrassing.
The vip guests are quickly filling the dining room of Cavatina restaurant, located in the world-famous Sunset Marquis hotel.
Back in the kitchen, a dispute between red team captain leslie and teammate Cutter is spiraling out of control.
Come here.
Come here.
Come here.
Both of you, come here.
This guy's just given me his restaurant.
Right, I hear you, chef.
So what we need to focus on is the job in hand.
Yes, chef.
And that is a fully-booked dining room and a fully Yes, chef.
Can you put your [bleep] to the side for a minute and come back to this competition? Yes, chef.
Yes, chef.
Now, shake hands, and we're gonna go through this as a team.
- Yes.
- Let's go.
Let's do it.
Every team Leslie's been on, he's had an issue with somebody.
He's a loser, and he's a sad excuse of a man, so I just got to play his game and just get through it.
Here we go.
First orders.
Good luck, guys.
Are we together as a team? Yes, chef.
Red team, an order.
Two covers, table two.
One gnocchi, one mussels.
Blue team, two covers, table two.
One gnocchi, one mussels.
Heard, yes? - Yes, chef.
- Got it? Let's go.
The tickets start flying in, and chef Ramsay starts screaming out all these numbers.
Four covers, table 14, two gnocchi, two mussels, followed by three gnocchi, one mussels.
I've never done this before.
This is all new to me.
I just got to keep saying, "Yes, chef.
Yes, chef.
" Don't stop working.
- Yes, chef.
- Thank you.
Come on, guys.
Give me salt and pepper.
I'm assigned to do gnocchi.
I won my apron on gnocchi, so I am going to do this perfectly.
Let's go, guys.
Red team, first table, how long? Got three gnocchi, one mussel.
Lovely, Leslie.
While the red team adapts to the fast pace of the kitchen and begins to send out orders, the blue team is struggling to get their appetizers out of the kitchen.
Blue team, look at me.
I hope you're joking.
Who done that? I did that.
It looks like glue.
I'm making you new ones.
- Glue? - Yeah, it looks like Yeah, you're being polite.
It looks like [bleep].
Enough's enough, now.
I'm sorry, chef.
Delegate it better.
I can't [bleep] do this [bleep].
This challenge is so intense and hard, and I'd rather just be here and cook than continuing being team captain and sink our ship.
Blue team, what is happening? I'm taking over as team captain.
You're the captain.
Let's go.
As Courtney, the newly-appointed captain, attempts to get the blue team headed in the right direction, the red team is working in complete harmony, blazing through the appetizer service.
You like that, Leslie? Yeah, that's good.
Just flip it, flip it, flip it.
Cutter and I did a full turnaround, and we're really working well together.
Two gnocchi.
Okay, yes, chef.
Service, please.
Thank you.
With just a few orders remaining, Leslie has his red team focused on completing all their appetizers.
Meanwhile, the blue team is still struggling to complete their first appetizer order.
These gnocchi are the hardest thing I've ever had to make in my life.
It's made with pate a choux, which is usually used in pastries, and it's such a delicate batter that it falls apart.
I'm scared to give this to him.
Give it to me.
If I give that to you, you're gonna throw it out.
Come on.
Can you tell me what to do so they don't turn into mush? First table.
You want me to be captain? Do you want, do you want me to take that badge? Yeah, sure.
Give it here.
Let's go.
- Be [bleep] captain, because - This is ridiculous.
I'm completely inadequate to be a team leader.
I don't have the experience in a hot kitchen at a fast pace, and I need to pass the baton over immediately.
Welcome to my world, you ladies.
Let's go.
The fact that red team is beating us right now, like, come on, you got Leslie, [bleep] Cutter.
So I'm gonna make sure that these gnocchi is cooked properly so we can get these orders out.
Come on, I need two orders of these mussels, Jaimee.
I got another order of gnocchis coming out.
Once I took the role of captain, everything started to flow quite good.
Your gnocchi are right here.
Finally.
Thank you, Christian.
- Yes, chef.
- Let's go.
Blue team, keep it going, yes? Yes, chef.
While new captain Christian has the blue team on track and sending out orders, the red team is putting the finishing touches on their final order of appetizers.
Great job.
You guys are doing a terrific job.
Out in the dining room, the red team's customers are giving Graham feedback on their appetizers.
I wanted to know what you thought of the gnocchi.
I think it's very flavorful.
Good, good.
I had the red team's mussels.
The sauce was actually really spicy.
It had a great bite.
I loved it.
In the kitchen, the blue team is finally plating their last order of appetizers.
- Let's go.
- Okay, service, please.
Good job.
It was hell, but good job.
Let's just focus on these entrees, and we can redeem ourself, okay? As the blue team catches their breath before the start of the entree service, the customers in the dining room are critiquing their appetizers.
I had the blue team mussels.
The broth is awesome.
It's, like, got the right amount of spice in it.
I had the blue team's gnocchi.
The flavors were actually quite enjoyable.
Despite their long wait, the blue team's customers are impressed with their dishes.
Back in the kitchen, both teams are working furiously as entree service begins.
Wake up.
We're live.
Let's go.
We can do this, guys.
We can do this.
Now we have a opportunity to show the chefs, we got this.
It's not how you start; it's how you finish.
Blue team, great first table.
Much better.
While Christian has the blue team off to a great start with the entrees, the pace of the kitchen has reignited the tension between red team captain Leslie and Cutter.
Leslie, do you want some help? No, I don't need help with the steak.
Take care of the bass.
Let's get more steaks on.
We can cook more than one order at a time.
Cutter, do me a favor.
Shut the [bleep] up.
I've been in a restaurant.
All you're doing is yelling at me, trying He won't listen to me.
Shut up.
You two! Come here.
I have never seen chef Ramsay so seethingly angry.
We're totally screwed.
With entree service in Hollywood's Cavatina restaurant in full swing, blue team captain Christian has his team on the same page and quickly completing orders.
How long on that sea bass? Get that sea bass out, Courtney.
Let's go! Meanwhile, the red team is in a state of chaos as Leslie and Cutter are once again at each other's throats.
You want to know what, Cutter, do me a favor.
Shut the [bleep] up.
I've been in a restaurant.
You two! Come here.
Come here.
Let me show you something now.
Come here.
Come here, you.
Out there is a [bleep] fully-booked restaurant, and I don't want them to hear you fighting and arguing.
Do you understand? Now, look at me.
I'll send you both home, and I'll get behind there, I swear to god, and I'll cook every [bleep] dish on my own with Elizabeth if you two don't get it together.
I don't want one more argument from anybody.
Differences aside, and focus on them.
- Yes, chef.
- Let's go.
- Got it? Let's go.
- Yes, chef.
Right now, I need to just speak to Cutter in a nice way, and if Cutter doesn't behave himself and do what he's told, then I don't need him in the kitchen.
He can go and sit in the corner like a little baby.
Leslie, this next steak, be careful.
- It's rare, okay? - Yes, chef.
- Cutter.
Yes, chef.
Sea bass skin nice and crispy, please, yes? Yes, chef.
We're now pros in a professional kitchen.
- Yes, chef.
- Let's go.
As the red team tries to put their personality differences aside, new captain Christian has the blue team thriving as a unit.
I want these plates going out looking good.
- Look how beautiful that is.
- Thank you.
Entrees are going very well.
We get in a rhythm of putting everything in the window at the same time.
Good job, blue team.
Let's go.
- Good job, blue team.
- Let's go.
- Jaimee.
- Yes? They look beautiful.
Let's go.
Service, please.
Blue team, your last table is two steak, both medium-well.
Keep it going, blue team.
Yes, chef.
As the blue team races to complete their final order of service the red team's roller coaster of conflict has come to a halt, and they're swiftly completing entree orders.
Now we're rolling.
Now we're rocking and rolling.
Cutter and Leslie have made up, and we finally, as one team, are putting out great plates.
and I think we're doing a great job.
Thank you, Elizabeth.
That's what I call finesse.
Yes, chef.
The last table is one bass, one steak medium-well.
Yes, chef.
Steak's coming out right now, chef.
Last table, blue team.
Let's go.
Good job.
Good job.
Come on, let's get it in the window.
- Come on.
- Thank you.
Christian did do a very good job.
We did end strong compared to how we began.
But I feel like I got hit by a car.
Good job, baby.
Leslie, last table.
Steak's ready.
- Medium-well, yes? - Yes.
Good.
Very nice.
Service, please.
Hallelujah, man.
Thank god this thing is finally over.
This had to be one of the toughest things I have ever done, and I am, like, exhausted.
As service comes to an end in the kitchen, the red team's customers in the dining room are giving feedback on their entrees.
How have the entrees been? It was really good.
It could have been Maybe the temperature a little bit warmer.
Okay.
Sea bass is very good.
Cooked well.
Especially like the garden vegetables it comes with.
A very nice touch.
The blue team's sea bass was delicious.
It was perfectly cooked, and I thought the presentation was very nice.
The blue team's steak was poorly seasoned, ao it's kind of, like, meat on a plate.
With service completed, the guests in the dining room have given both teams' entrees mixed reviews.
Okay, guys, come over.
First of all, well done.
I haven't had an easy service in my life yet.
That's after 25 years.
You dug in, and you got through it.
But this is a competition.
Graham and I have decided it's too close to call.
And you know what? The verdict will happen back in the MasterChef kitchen.
- Good job.
- Thank you, chef.
Well done.
- Good night.
- Good job, guys.
- Good job.
- Cheers, you guys.
Looking at the red team and all the arguing and commotion You know, my team didn't really have any of that.
I brought my team together, and I felt that we finished with a bang.
We looked a lot better than the blue team.
We had our moments with the yelling with me and Cutter, but in the end, we got things done.
And if we don't win, I'm gonna be upset.
One team, one dream.
I came here for a purpose.
I'm here for my son.
I want to show him, regardless of what you go through in life, you can always achieve your dream.
I definitely want to own my own restaurant in the next couple years, so I can't go home right now.
Welcome down, guys.
Come on in, please.
After this challenge, I've realized that I'm not cut out to work in a restaurant kitchen, but I still have a dream to become a full-time cookbook writer.
And I am not going home.
Welcome, everyone.
Now, last night, you all made a gigantic leap from humble home cooks to chefs running a dinner service in a truly professional kitchen.
Both teams had their ups and downs, and that's just the way that service goes, but it's how you bounce back from those moments that truly count.
Jaimee, what happened? I was not confident enough to lead the team, so I passed the torch along.
Leslie, Cutter, I pulled you two out.
- Yes, you did.
- Twice.
We had our differences, but we worked through it, and no matter what was going on, we still put out good dishes, I feel.
You got to cool it down, both of you.
Graham and I watched you cook.
We tasted everything.
After that, we spoke to all the guests, and we ultimately decided the winning team based on the performance in the kitchen and the feedback from the diners.
The winning team of the restaurant takeover challenge is Congratulations Graham and I watched you cook.
We tasted everything.
And we ultimately decided the winning team based on the performance in the kitchen and the feedback from the diners.
The winning team of the restaurant takeover challenge is Congratulations The red team.
Well done.
Did I just hear this right? What did he say? Leslie, finally, you've broken that duck.
I want to cry.
Hallelujah, man.
I finally won something Actlwhen I needed it Congratulations, red team.
As you know, cutter, it's not as you start, it's How you finish.
And when you listened, Those entrees flew out brilliantly.
You're all safe, and you're guaranteed now To be in the top five Of the biggest culinary competition in the world.
Let that sink in as you head up to the gallery.
Off you go.
- Thank you, chef.
- Well done.
Good job.
Blue team, please put these on.
Thank you.
I definitely failed as a team captain, so got to do what I got to do.
Unfortunately, tonight, all three of you will be cooking in this upcoming pressure test, And when it's over, at least one of you will be going home.
It's time to find out what you'll have to cook tonight in this dreaded pressure test.
Trust me, it's a tall order.
This dish takes one of these, a simple cream puff, And turns it into this stunning croquembouche.
This is a classic French dessert, beautiful to look at and even more incredible to eat, a spectacular tower of delightful cream puffs assembled into an incredible cone bound with threads of caramel.
Look at this light pastry, a beautiful cream filling inside like a little treasure.
Don't know what it is.
Never had it before.
Croquem-what? Forget the fancy name.
Let's just call it what it is: A big ol' yummy cream puff tower.
There are so many steps that can go wrong with this.
To get that pastry absolutely perfect.
That is not easy.
And then there's the filling.
The consistency has to be perfect, not too sweet, not too thick.
And make sure the whole thing doesn't fall over.
- Jaimee, can you do this? - Hell, yeah.
Courtney, can you do this? Yes, chef.
Christian, can you do this? Yeah, I guess.
It's time for all three of you to head to your stations.
It's sophisticated and elegant.
There is no way that Christian can do well in this challenge.
On your stations, you all have the exact same ingredients to make a magnificent cream puff tower.
You have just 90 minutes to make us a stunning croquembouche.
Is everybody ready? Yes, chef.
Your 90 minutes starts Now.
Let's go, Christian.
I've made a couple of croquembouches before, and so I don't think I'm going home today.
Although I've never made a croquembouche, I'm feeling very confident.
I'm not really too much of a dessert fan, But, hey, right now, this is a moment that I need to fight through this.
- Tough one.
- It's hard-core.
For me, the secret behind a great profiterole is to make sure you cook out that flour.
If you don't cook out that flour, "a," they don't rise properly, "b," the eggs don't immerse inside that mixture.
Once you've put the pate a choux in the oven and you've piped out those profiteroles, you start working on the pastry cream, and the creaminess and the texture of that is paramount, because you want no lumps.
Right.
- The technique is so involved.
- Yeah.
Okay, guys, hour and five minute remaining.
By now, your profiteroles should be in the oven.
Right, how you feeling? I'm feeling confident.
Can you bounce back? I can definitely bounce back.
How many croquembouches have you made? Probably, like, five.
If you're not going who is? I think Christian's pretty vulnerable.
You got this, baby.
Just under 45 minutes to go.
Start working on your pastry cream.
All right, christian.
Yes, chef.
You got your profiteroles out.
Now that they're made, it's all about getting them filled.
Yes, chef.
Now, what does the future hold for Christian if he goes home today? My focus is not going home.
We know how much your five-year-old son means to you, how important that is to set that example and to lead Definitely.
And how proud he's got to be to see you get to as far as you can get.
Yeah, you know, I came too far through life.
I went through a lot of stuff, and, you know, I don't want to be that person walking out.
I think you can make this happen.
- Yes, chef.
- All right, good luck.
Oh, god.
All right, Courtney, how's it shaping up? They're quite small, but it's gonna come together.
You got some awkward different shapes there.
Purposely done, or I was going for consistency, realized that they were a little too small, so I started making them bigger.
If you're not going home, who is? I don't know.
Are you thinking it's you? It quite possibly could be me, chef.
Wow, Courtney, you're feeling the pressure tonight, aren't you? Yes.
How's that for honesty? Get your sugar weighed out for that incredibly difficult caramel.
Right now, they got to start multitasking, filling up the profiteroles and starting that caramel all at the same time.
With the caramel, you're not touching it.
You just let it sit there and do its thing.
The minute you start shaking caramel, Stirring it, you're gonna crystallize it.
The minute it starts crystallizing, it goes grainy, almost like a broken sauce.
You don't have the glue to build it.
You start speeding up that process, the caramel goes to a bitter Right, it's gonna burn.
Overcooked, burned caramel.
So Jaimee has started building.
Courtney's starting to put her's together as well now.
So Christian's clearly behind at this stage.
Way behind, indeed.
Christian.
- Yes, chef.
- You okay? I'm waiting for this sugar to brown.
Why are you waiting for the sugar? It's not the right color.
If I don't get the right texture or the right color, I'm all the way screwed.
He's clearly out of his element.
You've got ten minutes.
With time running out in tonight's pressure test, Christian, Jaimee, and Courtney are battling it out to build a beautiful croquembouche tower.
Put it together with precision.
Get the caramel on.
Come on, caramel.
So Christian's clearly behind at this stage.
Way behind.
Time is running out, and I got to get this caramel going.
Christian, how long until you start assembling? Give me an idea.
I'm about to start doing it now, chef.
Good.
I'm literally sweating in my pants right now.
This is where it really takes the finesse, making sure it's gorgeous.
Courtney's is looking nice, coming up now.
She's going into the center a lot earlier than I expected.
You will fit.
Yes, that's right.
Eight minutes remaining.
Every profiterole needs to fit perfectly.
This sugar is hot.
Speed up, Christian.
Speed up.
Christian's is starting to collapse Because he used sugar syrup that hadn't gone to caramel on the first three layers.
Now it's starting to Now it's starting to collapse.
Let's go.
Oh, he's using tongs in a croquembouche.
Courtney's hitting hers with the spun sugar.
It's burnt.
This ain't happening.
Stop.
Hands in the air.
Time is up.
Wow.
Oh, my god.
It's time now to taste your croquembouche and find out who will be leaving the MasterChef kitchen tonight and who moves forward to the top five of the biggest culinary competition anywhere in the world.
Courtney.
Courtney can sometimes just nail it in crucial moments, and I have a lot of respect for that.
Visually, it looks beautiful.
It's the only one with the spun sugar.
The spun sugar just should tear away.
That's the idea.
Roll that 'round.
And when we serve these in the restaurants for a celebration, the spun sugar sits on top, and then, bang, you have there a beautiful croquembouche.
Caramel's lightly dipped.
And then for the crunch Crisp, light, beautiful.
Delicious.
- Thank you, chef.
- Absolutely delicious.
Finishing, gorgeous.
Pastry cream, light.
Good job.
- Thank you, chef.
- Thank you.
Look at that.
Nice.
Have you ever made one of these before? No, but my mom always told me she would love to make me one, so I just thought of her when I was making it.
With that spun sugar, it's not just a garnish to make it look pretty.
Like, it adds something, and Like that one that I just tried, tou can hear it crunching.
It adds a completely different dimension.
But the greatest thing in there is that pastry cream.
This is what we asked for.
This is top-notch.
- Good job.
- Thank you, chef.
Christian.
How're you feeling? Not too good.
I didn't get my sugar on in time, but hopefully the taste will get me through.
Visually, different-colored caramel.
On the bottom, I've got an unfinished caramel, almost like a sort of blond sugar syrup.
Some different shapes moving there.
You've got a slight indent here on the inside.
So now it looks like it's been slammed against the wall.
I was racing with time, so my focus was definitely start building.
Let's sample.
The secret is a gentle tap to break the caramel.
Nice-sounding caramel.
And that should just ease off.
Now Hardly any cream in there.
However, what you have nailed Is the cooking of the profiteroles.
They're light.
They're crisp on the outside.
Really tasty.
- Thank you, chef.
- Thank you.
All right, so I'm gonna go ahead and try one.
See, that's I got, like, three pieces on this one, just because of how much caramel now is on that, so The profiteroles are great.
the sugar is what's getting me, the fact that they're just, like, glued together.
Jaimee.
- Yes, chef.
- Wow.
Jaimee's looks real good.
It has the shape that it is supposed to be.
It look pretty much exactly as the one the chef presented, so I don't think she's going home today.
No finishing touches are on the outside.
No spun sugar? My sugar towards the bottom, it was easing up.
What worried me, the amount of sugar.
None of this sugar should be seen.
It should be almost like a glue that sticks them together from the outside, because the problem that I'm gonna have now is, when I pick on off there like that, the whole lot is gonna come up in my hand.
The delicate way that you put this together here was brilliant, but then here I've got this mask of heavy, sticky caramel.
I'm gonna ask you to do something.
I want you to take one off for me.
- I'm not gonna be able to.
- No? If you're not gonna be able to do it, then how the hell am I? Jaimee, I want you to take one off for me.
- I am not gonna be able to.
- No? If you're not gonna be able to do it, then how the hell am I? - That is the best I can.
- Ok.
But just look at the wedge of caramel there.
Every time when i lift one i just get a bits of that.
Touch on the top of there.
It is wet because of the undercook It may look good, but it tastes nowhere near as good as it looks.
So now, look at all this sugar starts looking That was a incredibly difficult pressure test.
Sadly, one of you is going home, and we need a moment to discuss that now.
That has to be the most difficult pressure test ever.
Ever, for sure.
Courtney, delicious, light, cooked perfectly.
I mean, Jaimee's, visually, tonight, looked incredible.
Absolutely.
I thought for sure that was gonna be the star.
Christian's has to be one of the better-tasting.
Visually, it doesn't have that wow factor.
Right, not at all.
Nowhere near as pretty as the others.
- Yeah.
- Are you certain? - Yeah, yeah.
- Yeah? Here we go.
Tonight, there was one croquembouche that stood out for all the right reasons in terms of its finesse, its practicality, but more importantly, the taste.
Congratulations Courtney.
- Great job.
- Thank you, chef.
Well done.
Head up to the balcony.
Thank you.
Jaimee's critique was not that good.
You know, mine wasn't the best, so we shall see.
Christian and Jaimee, that was a tall order tonight.
However, we can only judge you both on what you put forward.
Christian's looked awful, so I have a little bit of hope.
The person leaving MasterChef and we are so sorry to see this individual go I have to redeem myself.
I don't want to be that person going home.
I don't want to let my family down.
I don't want to let my son down.
I need to win right now.
The person leaving MasterChef tonight is Jaimee Vitolo.
Christian, say good-bye to Jaimee.
Congratulations, you're in the top five.
Head up to the balcony.
Oh, Jaimee, we went into this pressure test tonight, young lady, let me tell you, thinking you were the one that was safe.
Your bakery assistant's experience didn't shine through, and unfortunately, my darling, you produced a croquembouche that may have looked beautiful but was totally impractical to break down.
I'm sorry, my darling.
Come and say good-bye now, darling, please.
I'm so sad.
Come on.
Come on, gorgeous little thing.
Come here.
You're in New York, I'm in New York.
You need a door opening in our restaurants, we're there, guaranteed.
I haven't got a job going home, so Darling, we can help that.
- Thank you.
- Okay? - Thank you.
- Well done, darling.
Thanks.
Put your apron on your bench.
Take care.
As a kid, I didn't have any friends.
I got bullied.
But now I've become stronger.
- Jaimee.
- I think I might pee my pants.
- Bloody delicious.
- Thank you.
You are now the most famous blueberry tart in New Jersey.
- Congratulations.
- Thank you.
Good job, Jaimee! The chefs definitely helped me boost my confidence.
I learned a lot about not just cooking, but about myself.
This is one of the funniest moments of my life ever.
The red team, ladies and gentlemen! Nothing's getting in my way now.
I mean, I made it to the top six.
Like That's a huge hurdle I just jumped, so I've overcome a lot of things that I didn't think I'd ever be able to do.
Next week I'm sure you've missed your loved ones.
It's a two-hour MasterChef packed with emotion.
I'll be honest with you.
He's my hero in life.
You will make their favorite dish.
- Love you, Paula.
- Make something yummy.
and then The home cooks take on a gruesome challenge.
- How do I do this? - Who's got the brains I never made brains a day in my life.
- who has the heart - Nice.
- and who gets the - Testicles.
- Are you excited? - Yes, chef.
- No, chef.
After a coast-to-coast search for the best home cooks in America MasterChef! Just 22 were chosen to wear the coveted white apron.
It's time for the world's biggest cooking competition to truly begin.
Here they come! Some have risen to the occasion - Red team, ladies and gentlemen! - Yeah! But many have cracked under the pressure.
I will throw your ass out of here faster than you can even imagine.
Now just five remain Elizabeth.
It's sophisticated.
Seasoned beautifully.
This dish is like you: A serious contender.
Leslie.
Wow.
You really can teach an old dog new tricks.
It's beautiful.
Courtney.
This is you at your best right now.
Delicious.
Ambitious.
You're just getting better and better.
Cutter.
Cutter, you may have a face like a british bulldog chewed a wasp, but you do cook like an angel.
And Christian.
Just the minute I'm ready to write you off, you come back with a dish like this.
Thank you.
Now they go head-to-head in a fiery two-hour edition.
Remember what's at stake.
But only one can claim the title of MasterChef.
I'm in the top five.
It doesn't get any better than this except for number one, and I plan on being number one.
My dream is to have a food truck.
I'm doing this for my fiance.
She saw the ambition.
She saw the motivation.
And MasterChef means the world to me.
Welcome back, everyone.
The final five.
Before we show you what's under this big box, let's show you what's under all your mystery boxes.
One, two, three.
Nothing.
Because the most important ingredient is under this box.
I see a bunch of feet, and then see pair of feet about that big.
And my six-year-old brother is standing there.
Please welcome your loved ones.
Oh, my gosh.
You've all been gone from home for so long now, I'm sure you've all missed your loved ones.
Now, Courtney, your six-year-old dude of a brother, Cooper.
Yeah.
How long ago was it you saw him? Almost a year.
I don't get to see my brother that often.
I moved to Philadelphia four months after he was born.
I missed out on his first steps, his first words.
You've gotten so big.
I really feel like I'm missing out on a lot of his life.
I want to make him proud of me today.
I love you.
Good to see you, buddy.
Welcome.
Stand over there.
He's so strong Christian, your beautiful fiance Jasmine.
My fiance is definitely my pedestal when I can't stand.
Baby.
Her being here gives me that motivation, that little oomph.
Elizabeth, you had been married for just five months when you came here to the MasterChef kitchen.
That's right.
Your husband Ross is here All the way from Brooklyn, New York.
Why don't you go and join your lovely wife and say hello? Hi, babe.
Mm, so happy to see you.
So happy to see you.
Cutter, your dad David is here all the way from Beaumont, Texas.
We know you guys are super close.
What have you missed the most about your dad? He's my best friend.
I'll be honest with you, he's mymy hero in life.
Why don't you go over there and give him that bear hug? All right, thanks.
- How you doing? - What's up? - You're looking good.
- You too.
Yeah? Leslie, your gorgeous wife Paula.
- Have you missed him? - Oh, it's terrible.
It's so lonely at home.
So quiet.
Where is the off button? We haven't found it in months.
I haven't found it in 20 years.
He's dying to see you.
Are you ready? - Oh, yeah.
- Please.
Go and see him.
Welcome, my darling.
Thank you.
I've missed you so much.
I've missed you so much.
I'm so proud of you.
Amazing.
Obviously, tonight's mystery box is gonna be working a little differently.
You and your loved ones will take those empty mystery boxes back into the MasterChef pantry to get everything you will need to make their favorite dish.
Paula.
What is the dish of Leslie's that you miss the most? His herb-crusted rack of lamb.
Ah.
Dave.
Just a good ol' blackened red snapper steak.
- Our newlyweds.
- Italian meatballs and grits.
Jasmine, what is it, my darling? Reveal all.
It's actually his seafood gumbo.
- Oh, man.
- Seafood gumbo.
Ah.
Cooper, you shout it out.
What is the dish you miss the most? Mac and cheese! I love mac and cheese.
You now need to make an elevated version of that dish in just 60 minutes.
Show your family and us just how far you've grown across this competition.
Your 60 minutes starts Now.
Run! Run, Cooper! Run, Cooper! Run, run, run, run, run! - Got to run.
- Got it.
Okay.
Okay, so we're gonna do a blackened red snapper.
Me and my dad have a great relationship.
He's my huntin' buddy, my fishin' pal.
He took me in as his son at five years old.
Spinach and carrots? My mom was a single mom raising a kid, and he went from being a bachelor to taking on a family, and I think that's a huge compliment to him as a person and as a man.
I need tomatoes.
Tomatoes, tomatoes, tomatoes.
Oh, I need roasted tomatoes.
Little ones, yep.
My wife's the breadwinner.
When I first met her, I married her with five children.
She was tired of being a stay-at-home wife I'll just drink the wine.
And I was tired of working three jobs.
So I've been cooking for She's a wonderful mother, a wonderful wife.
She's my soul mate.
- All right, you carry it now.
- I got it.
There it is.
Oh! Onions.
I think we're gonna beat 'em.
Come on.
Speed up, guys.
Go upstairs.
See you in a minute.
Let's go.
Well, we're at the final five.
What an incredible day to bring in their loved ones.
You know, that's a lot of inspiration, but it's also a lot of pressure.
They haven't seen their families now for months and months and months.
Christian's gumbo.
Time.
Worried about the time.
'Cause you know it takes two hours plus to cook it.
Yeah, minimum.
I don't know how he does it in an hour.
So Jasmine may have thrown him a wrench - By picking the gumbo.
- Yeah.
He might be in trouble.
So I think Courtney, by far, has the hardest task here.
Mac and cheese something that we all know and love, but how do you elevate it? I'm gonna do a truffled lobster mac and cheese with some shaved truffle and a panko bread crumb that I'm gonna season and toast off.
I love you, Paula! I love you, Les.
Make something yummy.
I'm making an elevated rack of lamb with some beets, butternut squash, mushrooms, And it's it's gonna be really nice.
- Christian, how you doing? - I'm doing great, chef.
First of all, wow, what a lovely lady.
- Thank you.
- Gumbo.
Something that she absolutely adores.
How on Earth are you gonna get this done in 60 minutes? 'Cause you know it takes minimum 90 minutes, two hours.
It takes a minimumyes, chef, I'm gonna get it done.
How you gonna elevate that? I'm gonna have a lot of seafood in there with a little bit of Andouille sausage.
New Orleans touch to it.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.
It's half the time gone.
You have 30 minutes left to cook.
- Hi, chefs.
- So, Elizabeth, what is it exactly? I don't get it.
Meatballs and polenta are a pretty traditional pairing, and grits are like the polenta of the South.
It seems so simple.
How do you elevate it? The meatballs have five meats.
Mortadella, ground veal, ground pork, ground beef, and Italian pork sausage.
- Good luck.
- Thank you so much, chefs.
- Wow.
- Interesting.
It smells awesome.
The speed in the way they're cooking today is incredible.
No doubt that Leslie is in the pole position today.
I think the rack of lamb is a restaurant protein.
I'm really worried about Elizabeth, just because it's gonna be hard to elevate two rustic ingredients.
Come on, family members.
Give them some support.
Last minute.
Come on, Les! Come on, Courtney! Come on, Chris.
You got this.
- Let's go, guys, come on.
- Come on.
Come on, speed up.
It's almost to zero.
Ten, nine, eight, seven Hurry up! Six, five, four, three, two, one.
Stop.
Hands in the air.
Still to come, in a two-hour MasterChef, the home cooks face some gruesome proteins Heart, brains, tongue, and testicles.
Ew.
Come on, family members.
Give them some support.
For MasterChef's top five, it's a mystery box challenge that's personal.
Come on, Courtney! The home cooks have had just one hour to turn a loved one's favorite dish into a restaurant-quality plate.
Five, four, three, two, one.
Stop.
Hands in the air.
Looks incredible.
Throughout the challenge, the judges taste elements of all the home cooks' dishes - as they come together.
- Nice color.
They now take one last look to choose the top three standouts, and the winner will receive a major advantage in the next round.
- Fantastic.
- Amazing.
- She did something - Unbelievable.
It's incredible.
Tough one, this one tonight, however, the first dish out of the top three that we want to take a much closer look at That dish clearly elevated that humble dish that their loved one chose for them and took it to a completely different level, definitely restaurant-quality dish Please step forward Courtney.
Yes.
Describe the dish, please.
I made for you a truffled lobster mac and cheese with fried brussels sprouts and a fried quail egg.
So when you break into it, the yolk will run over the lobster and make a lovely sauce.
The dish is delicious and complex in flavor.
Trying to get the cheeses matching the sweetness of the lobster is a tall order.
- And you've done that perfectly.
- Thank you.
Pasta is cooked beautifully.
Saucethick, rich.
Everything you want from a mac and cheese.
You've elevated, definitely.
Good job.
- Thank you.
- Thank you, chef.
I know.
So when young Cooper said "Mac and cheese," I was like, "Uh-oh.
" But you turned it into, really, a world-class pasta dish.
I want to ke you something very elegant, which is why I chose the orecchiette pasta, and I wanted to do a trio of cheeses instead of just, you know, the standard.
Breaking down those cheeses and making the sauce without breaking them is a very difficult thing to do.
You made a fonduta, is what we call a cheese sauce in Italian, and perfectly.
- That takes a lot of technique.
- Yeah.
Cooper, what do you think? Are you proud of your big sis? Yes.
- Congratulations.
- Thank you very much.
The second dish that we would like to examine further This home cook really dug down deep and used some bold flavors.
They were given a really tall order to pull off in just an hour, but somehow they managed to pull through.
Please come forward Christian.
Ah, yes.
Please describe your dish.
It's a New Orleans gumbo.
There's some crawfish in there, some crab in there, some Andouille sausage, and I made my own seafood stock.
It'sit's like taking a big drink from the ocean, except it's flavored beyond belief.
That umami, that meatiness that comes out with it, the right level of salt, seasoning.
Everything.
I mean, it's showing how far you've come - to be able to rock it out that quick - Mm-hmm.
to be able to really showcase the techniques, getting that shellfish cooked off and a stock made from it.
- Yes.
- That's a dish that anybody would want to just sit down and keep eating.
- Wow.
- It's great.
One of your best.
- Good job.
- Thank you.
This is, you know, taking us right back to New Orleans.
Definitely, without a doubt.
It tastes delicious.
I mean, right combination of heat, and I think there's a lot of professional chefs out there tonight who would struggle to get that done within 60 minutes.
What would I do differently? Less rice, sausage a little bit finer.
However, the more pressure we put you under, the better you perform.
Jasmine, you should come back more often because I think she's got the best out of you.
- Wow.
- Good job.
Well done.
Thank you, chef.
The third dish we wanted to take a closer look at had a lot of difficult components.
It seems to all come together on this plate.
This home cook took a rustic dish and definitely elevated it.
Please step forward Elizabeth.
So what's the dish? This is an herb grits with sauteed broccoli rabe, roasted fennel, and a five-meat meatball in a simple tomato sauce.
They look nice.
They're, like, a very course cut.
- Mm-hmm.
- This seems very loose.
I did add a little bit of Italian bread soaked in milk to kind of try to bring it together and give it that lightness.
The meatballs are really, really good.
They got a little bit of crispiness on the outside, nice and moist on the inside.
It's butiful collection of flavors.
Your tomato sauce is good.
It's got good acidity.
Broccoli's delicious.
A very strong dish.
Thank you.
Wow.
The meatballs taste like they've been cooked for hours, but they haven't.
Grits I absolutely love.
They've been elevated into something luxurious.
Saucerich in flavor.
Fennel.
- Meatballs have all gone posh now, right? - Yes.
- Really good job.
- Thank you, chef.
Delicious.
Really good, indeed.
Of course I want to win, and I want Ross to see me win.
But more importantly, winning this mystery box is gonna put me in front of Courtney in the competition.
GumboI can't believe he pulled that off.
Yeah, how'd you get that in 60 minutes? I've only won the mystery box once before, and just to win this mystery box in front of my fiance would mean the world to me.
Courtney's mac and cheese I mean, really, she got the whole thing.
I just want to win this for my little brother.
I want to make him proud.
Three amazing dishes, but, as we know, only one can be the winner.
The person who did their loved one's favorite dish justice That home cook is Three amazing dishes, but, as we know, only one can be the winner.
That person that took it and elevated it to a MasterChef level This home cook will now join us in the pantry and get a huge advantage in the upcoming elimination challenge.
Congratulations Elizabeth.
You are officially in the top four.
Yay.
It's like winning two times over, 'cause I win the challenge and I win in front of my husband.
That's, like, the best thing ever.
Ross, how are you feeling? It's amazing.
I'm so proud of her.
Aw.
Brilliant.
Good job.
Please, I'd like to invite all our family members to come down the stairs carefully and say good-bye to your loved ones.
You know, give a big hug.
Say good-bye, bud.
I love you.
Whoever your loved one is.
- I love you too.
- I love you.
- Love you.
- Okay.
Love you too.
I love you.
You did a beautiful job.
Thank you, families, for joining us on this fantastic challenge tonight.
Safe trip back.
Dave, take care.
- Bye-bye.
- We enjoyed it.
Good night, darling.
Wow.
How exciting is that? Elizabeth, let's go.
Good job, by the way.
- Thank you.
- Amazing.
Elizabeth, congratulations on winning the mystery box challenge tonight.
Weeks ago, this kind of advantage was big.
Now it's ten times bigger.
There's only five of you left.
Here you have four faces on a plate: Christian, Cutter, Courtney, and then finally, Leslie.
I'm about to present you with four very different, somewhat unique protein.
All you need to do tonight, Elizabeth, is put one protein on each plate.
Yes, chef.
First, you have something that, honestly, I love to cook.
An ox heart.
- Wow.
- It's 100% muscle.
Very difficult, very demanding, very challenging.
When it's right, it melts in your mouth.
The next choice is an ingredient that you're gonna actually have to use in making these decisions.
Brains.
Veal brains, to be precise.
Very, very delicate.
These will overcook in a second.
They take so much finesse.
You need just the right balance of flavors to get this right.
So the next choice is the tongue.
Lamb's tongue, to be more specific.
Tongue can be very rich, but very difficult to cook, and if it's not cooked properly, it becomes sinewy and almost un-edible.
So the final choice is Oh, god.
This is a delicacy beyond belief.
Ooh-wee.
Do you have any idea what these are? Those are balls, chef.
- These are buffalo testicles.
- Wow.
These are very difficult to cook.
The texture can be so chewy.
If you don't have the proper technique, this can become a mouthful nobody wants to eat.
Four challenging proteins.
Four home cooks.
It's time to put one protein on each face.
You must be happy.
Yeah.
Heck, yeah.
Well done.
Now, back in the pantry, Elizabeth got some huge advantages.
She does not have to cook in tonight's elimination challenge.
In the pantry, we asked Elizabeth to select a different protein for each of you.
Elizabeth, Elizabeth, Elizabeth.
Yes.
Elizabeth got to choose between: Heart, brains, tongue, and testicles.
Ew.
- Are you excited? - Yes, chef.
- No, chef.
- No? I ain't never cooked that before, chef.
But you know what? I'm gonna do what I got to do.
Good.
Glad to hear it.
Are you ready to find out what Elizabeth has chosen for you? Yes, chef! The answer is in the pantry, along with finding everything else you need to make us one stunning dish.
Your one hour starts Now.
Oh, I got the brains.
Oh, Christian For all his tough guy demeanor He's squeamish, but he's a super strong competitor and I want him out because he keeps cooking well.
So, Christian, you get the veal brains.
- Oh, my god.
- Oh, tongue.
Oh, nice.
Heart as big as Texas, right? I got the balls.
I save the buffalo testicles for my biggest competition, which is Courtney.
This is my chance to serve her back a little bit and get revenge because if there's one thing that can trip anybody up testicles.
Great.
Let's, uh, go shopping.
What am I gonna do? Let's I'm taking this dish and I'm gonna flip this around.
This is going to be the fanciest bull testicle anyone has ever seen in their life.
Nice, Cutter.
Interesting.
Very interesting.
Never made brains a day in my life.
But at the end of the day, I mean, [bleep], it's top five, so you never know what they're gonna throw at you.
Thank you for the brains, Elizabeth! Sorry.
All right, so we have heart, testicles, brains, and tongue.
What do you think the hardest to work with? The brains.
Christian has really got his work cut out there because they're so delicate.
Poach them one minute too long, it turns into mush.
It's like cooking custard.
In my opinion, the most difficult protein tonight is the testicles, and giving them to Courtney was a real hard hit.
If you decide to cut 'em when they're still raw, it's like popping a water balloon.
They ooze out.
Exactly.
Just under 40 minutes to go! Christian, you've got brains.
How's it going? - It's going all right.
- Pasta.
Pasta sauce.
- It's going okay.
- Where are your brains? My brains are right there.
I boiled them.
Boiled them, like, cooked? - That's a little, like, hot.
- Like, over a little bit.
You want to do a low temperature.
They're gonna be very mealy, I think, - where they should be creamy.
- Uh-huh, like that.
What do you plan to do with it now? I'm gonna stuff it in a pasta.
Do you have ricotta? I didn't grab my ricotta or my mozzarella.
- Wow.
- What's gonna be your filling? - Just brains? - That's too rich.
- Nothing else with it? - Probably put some vegetables in there.
I have never heard of anything like your dish before.
Cooking some lamb tongue, so hopefully it'll get tender, and then I'm gonna sear it and see what happens.
I think Christian has a tough one.
He has the brains.
And those can go South real quick.
I'd be nervous if I had brains.
I had to restart this pasta, so it's not going good right now.
Come on, Christian.
As I'm watching the cook go down, Christian is really, really frantic.
Just looking at his face, he looks scared.
Christian's in a complete tailspin.
She dealt him a direct and severe blow with the brains, because she might send him home.
Oh, my god.
- Wow.
- Wow.
This is like a dream come true.
I think Christian is going home on this one.
Christian's in a complete tailspin.
She dealt him a direct and severe blow with the brains, because she might send him home.
I had to restart this pasta, so it's not going good right now.
Come on, Christian.
[bleep].
It's not time to go home.
I'm not ready to give my apron up.
And at the end of the day, I have to elevate this dish, I decided to do what I know, and I'm gonna bread my brains, make a brain parmesan pasta and see how far these brains take me.
Hopefully they don't take me back to New Orleans.
Under 30 minutes to go.
Oh, stock is beautiful.
Right, Courtney.
- How are you feeling? - Very good, chef.
You have a tough one tonight.
Testicles.
Not the kind of thing you eat every weekend.
Come on.
Yeah, but I'm not afraid of it.
- So what's the dish? - I'm doing a pot-au-feu.
What's the base of the pot-au-feu? It's gonna be a vegetable stock.
- On buffalo testicles? - Wow, okay.
- Yeah.
And then I'm going to slice them into little medallions, - which I'm going to fry.
- Wow.
I think that Elizabeth found it irresistible to give me testicles.
Trust me, she knew that was one of the most difficult proteins to pull off.
- Good luck.
- Yes.
Thank you, chef.
All right, Cutter, so ox heart.
What did you decide to go with this? I'm gonna do a stuffed poblano pepper with an ox heart filleted on top.
How are you gonna cook the ox heart? I'm gonna cook it like a fillet.
Like a steak.
Which piece are you cooking? I'm gonna cook this one first.
You're cooking this? - I was gonna - That? - That whole thing? - That'll take hours.
I mean, that's, like, four times thicker.
This is something that you should be comfortable with, right? I feel comfortable with it, but it's the pressure of knowing that I could go home tonight if I don't get it right.
- All right, good luck.
- Thanks.
- Appreciate it.
- Taste that.
- Young man, how are you feeling? - Feeling good.
There's a lot going on here.
What's in there? Carrots, celery, onions Tongue? Is the tongue in there? Yes, the tongue is definitely in there.
Okay, good.
So you're braising it.
Yes, and then I'm also gonna put the bok choy - and some spinach on top.
- Sounds delicious.
- Confident you can get into top four? - Definitely top four.
- Good luck.
- Thank you, chef.
Guys, 15 minutes to go.
- Fascinating.
- Wow.
I mean, "a," it smells incredible.
It does smell really good in here.
So Courtney's doing A pot-au-feu of buffalo testicles.
Pot-au-feu, right, pot on fire? That's the ideayou're taking rough cuts and stewing it.
If you cut it the right way and cook it down, - yeah, could be good.
- Exactly.
Cutter? Cutter is taking heart he cut a piece about that thick and said he was gonna cook it like a fillet.
- It's, like, completely rare.
- It's got a long way to go.
Christian is hitting an all-time low - for the MasterChef kitchen.
- What is he doing? He's putting pasta in ice water.
- I've never seen that before.
- Never.
This is the most disorganized I've seen him.
- He's in trouble.
- Yeah.
- Wow.
- Leslie, on the other hand the actual dish sounds incredible.
- The tongue's being braised with red wine.
- Nice.
If I don't make the final four, they got no taste buds.
Oh, my god, come on.
This has got to cook.
A little bit more.
I've kicked this challenge in its testicles, that's for certain.
Last two minutes.
And for one of you, your last two minutes in the MasterChef kitchen.
Come on.
Gorgeoeous.
Taste everything.
Remember what's at stake.
- Come on, Christian.
- Oh, my god, Christian.
It'sit's a mess.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
And stop! Hands in the air.
Tough challenge.
Let's start with Christian.
I am very upset at myself.
Walking up to the judges, I feel that my plating is not to what they're looking for, but my only hope is that it tastes delicious.
Describe your dish.
Brain parmesan pasta.
I didn't get an opportunity to put the parmesan on it, so it's really a brain tomato pasta.
What happed to you today? I don't know.
I didn't maintain my time.
I mean, I never worked with brain before.
I never had brain, so - Let's start with the pasta.
- Yeah.
So you did things to pasta that I've never seen done.
You didn't roll it out.
You didn't work it.
And then you put it in ice water? Well, I put it in ice water to cool, but Why did you put the pasta - I should've put it in the hot skillet.
- What - Not using my brain.
- Mm.
I know you're a better cook than this.
Damn right.
I mean, 'cause the pasta itself, considering you put it in ice, it's not even terrible.
Tell me about the tomato sauce.
Bell peppers, oregano How much oregano? A wholewell, a stem in there, yeah.
You just put raw oregano in tomatoes? All right, tell me about the brains.
So you fried them? Yeah, I friedI breaded them in the grape seed oil.
- The brains are delicious.
- Wow.
It's everything else that pulled you down.
- Tomato sauce is terrible.
- Yes, sir.
- We're in the final five.
- Yes, sir.
- It's elimination.
- Yes, sir.
Just cutting it open like that, the brains They're cooked perfectly.
And then the browning on 'em spot-on.
Yes, chef.
- Tastes awesome.
- They do taste good.
But I mean, what's going on with the rest of the dish? Clumsy mistakes, like I said before.
The biggest mistake for you was in the pantry itself when you were conceptualizing your dish and you somehow decided you were gonna do pasta and tomato sauce.
It doesn't make any sense to me.
I think that Elizabeth, when she had her choice back there, she put a target on your back and it ended up being like a head shot because this I mean, this is probably the worst dish that you have ever presented us.
And it's at the time that you need to give us your best.
I think that Elizabeth, when she had her choice back there, she put a target on your back and it ended up being like a head shot - because this - Wow.
This is probably the worst dish that you have ever presented us.
And it's at the time that you need to give us your best.
All right, thanks.
I am pissed right now.
That dish is not me.
The pasta and that sauce was not where it needed to be.
But at the end of the day, they said that the brains was good.
So I'm hoping that my protein just gets me through this.
Right, Courtney, let's go.
Describe the dish, please.
Today I made fried herb de provence testicle over a pot-au-feu.
Visually, it looks gorgeous.
I've never quite, in the history of my cooking career, seen a testicle so glamorous as that.
Pretty impressive.
And the coating on the outside? Some cornmeal, herb de provence, salt, pepper.
Mm-hmm, and how did you cook these vegetables? I braised them in the broth.
Delicious.
Refined.
And the proteinthe bit that we're all focused on tonight Nailed.
- Thank you.
- I mean, really good indeed.
Finesse.
You've managed to give a difficult protein A little bit of glamour.
Good job.
- Thank you.
- Thank you, chef.
That's really delicious.
The fact that you can take something that's really rustic and cheap and turn 'em into something delicious If you served that to someone, didn't tell 'em what it was, they would be asking for seconds and thirds.
They are awesome.
I think you just really took this as an opportunity to intimidate your tough competitor and show everyone else behind you how badass you are.
- Good job.
- Thank you, thank you.
I've absolutely proven to Elizabeth that it doesn't matter what you throw at me.
I'm going to send it back to you singing.
- Good job, Cot.
- Thank you.
Next up, Leslie.
Describe the dish, please.
It's a braised lamb tongue over Yukon gold and parsnip puree with some spinach and some bok choy.
Visually, it's not your best-looking plate.
That's for sure.
It's somewhat clumsy.
There's the back part of the tongue connected to the throat that you didn't cut off.
So you didn't clean any of that out, so I got a little bit of I didn't Almost like cartilage at the back.
I took the skin off, but I didn't realize - that needed to be cleaned.
- Yeah.
It's a shame, 'cause the actual flavor is delicious.
Braised beautifully, and it's sort of rustic.
Doesn't need spinach and bok choy.
I expect you to nail those little components of the dish at this stage in the game.
Someone's going home tonight.
- Thank you.
- Thank you, chef.
Gordon's right.
You didn't clean it very well.
Okay.
You put an incredible amount of garlic in here.
What, did you have garlic in the bok choy? Yeah, there's a touch.
You know, we're at the top four now, so were scrutinizing even the smallest little mistake.
- I understand.
- You think you're gonna play another day with this? Yes, I think I'll play another day.
I mean, there's one thing to have a certain swagger about your ability and you've done very well, but sometimes great cooks get sent home on one mistake, one missed step.
It's not great.
All right, last up: Cutter.
Please describe your dish.
I have a ox heart Topped with a mushroom ancho chili sauce on top of a chorizo and cheese stuffed poblano with a Mexican corn salad underneath.
This is the first time that I have ever truly seen you on a plate.
- Thank you.
- I hope you enjoy it.
It's the best plate that you've ever put up as far as the presentation, and when you look at the cook that you got on the top and bottom, I think youyou did it right where it needs to be.
Thank you.
It's cooked beautifully.
Using what you know down in the Southwest and being able to put that on a plate, it's like, finally, you're arriving.
You know? I'm excited.
- Good job.
- Thank you.
This is delicious.
You cooked this heart about as good as it could be cooked.
Thank you.
It's crunchy on the outside.
What did you season it with? I made my own little rub of chili powder, paprika, things like that.
That rub is some recipe you should keep in your pocket, - 'cause it is right on.
- Thank you.
Contrasts perfectly the richness.
That makes the dish.
That rub, the way you cooked it.
Very, very impressive.
- Good job, Cutter.
- Thank you.
I impressed Joe.
How cool is that? Finally, the old Texas boy impresses the Yankee.
Well done, all of you.
Some great-tasting dishes.
Can all four of you please come down to the front? Thank you.
Tough night.
Very tough indeed.
There were two great dishes tonight.
The first dish Congratulations, Cutter.
- Good job.
- Thank you.
It was a great dish.
It was really imaginative.
However, the best dish of the night belongs to Courtney.
- Great job.
- Thank you.
- Congrats.
- Thank you.
You are both safe from elimination.
Please join Elizabeth up on the balcony.
Good job, guys.
Good job, man.
They sent Cutter up to the balcony before me, and I'm thinking, okay, I'm not liking this.
I could be going home, you know? - Good job.
- Thanks.
That leaves us Christian and Leslie.
We have to lose one of you tonight.
The person going home is Christian and Leslie.
We have to lose one of you tonight.
The person going home is Joe, wait a minute.
Do we have to send one of them home? Christian man, he's a talented guy.
I mean, he's my dirty South brother, man.
I mean, me and him, Texas, Louisiana.
We stick by each other's side.
The guy is an amazing cook.
- The tongue wasn't clean.
- Right.
We weren't judging on the pasta.
We were judging on the brain.
But it's part of the dish, though.
Leslie has this crazy will and determination, so I have a lot of respect for him.
He's really proven himself.
There's highs and lows, but What's the hero? - The protein.
- Yeah.
This is the toughest decision that we've made so far.
Christian and Leslie, whatever the result is tonight, it hurts us to say good-bye.
The person leaving MasterChef tonight, not advancing to the final four, that person is Christian.
Leslie, please say good-bye to Christian and head upstairs.
- Good luck, bro.
- Wish you the best.
Christian, you are one of the best cooks that we've ever had in here, and that pasta and the brains might have slipped you up, but you know that you belong in a kitchen.
Young man, my only hope is that you continue to follow that dream.
And if you're looking for an investor across your food truck launch, then call me.
- Wow, that's nice.
- Wow.
'Cause I know you've got it.
Yes, chef.
Come and say good-bye.
- Peace, bro.
- Thank you, brother.
- Good luck.
- Good job.
Ah, yeah, yeah.
Well done, bud.
- Thank you.
- Yeah.
Now, one, two, three, four Can't quite believe we're asking you this However, who's gonna win MasterChef? I'm sorry, Cutter.
I'm sorry, Leslie.
I'm sorry, Courtney, but, hands down, Elizabeth.
Go on, big man.
- Thank you.
- Take care, man.
I am very thankful to go that far in this competition, and chef Ramsay, he's willing to offer me help me get my own food truck.
That means so much to me, because I came in this competition with nothing and I gave it everything that I got.
Christian.
These culinary experts They see something in me.
That's a great, great dish, and it shows the arc of your journey, where you're at now.
Thank you, chef.
Tonight's king of the kitchen Christian.
Get outta here.
Wow.
I'm proud of myself, and at the end of the day, I made my family proud.
I made my son proud.
I'm sure I made New Orleans proud.
Turn it up, you guys! High five.
Red team.
I can't wait to get that food truck.
I can't wait to follow the dream I came here to do.
Yeah, baby! 
Right now on MasterChef Girls versus the boys.
The final four go to war.
Don't worry about it.
No, I'm gonna worry about it 'cause it doesn't taste good.
That is vile.
It should come with a health warning.
In a battle of the sexes - Get them steaks on there.
- Easy, cowboy.
What do you think you've got on your team that the blue team doesn't have? Two winners.
But when bitter rivals clash The things you tell me are [bleep] that I already know.
four become three, and blood is spilt.
Damn it! This is the final four.
This is an opportunity for me to finally live my dream and open up this bistro casual restaurant in Malibu, and hopefully I'll be the last man standing.
Come on down, guys.
My dream is to become a food critic.
I want to write about the little dive bars or the hole in the wall.
This is the turning point in my life where I can make food my new lifestyle.
Welcome to the final four of MasterChef.
As you can see behind you, there are only two stations set up tonight.
You'll be cooking in this challenge in two teams of two.
Win this challenge, and the two members of your team will earn a spot in the top three of MasterChef.
Lose, and you'll go head-to-head with your teammate for elimination.
Courtney, you had the best dish in the last elimination challenge, so you're gonna be picking first and deciding who is on each team.
Everyone except Courtney, please step to the side.
I have a really hard decision to make.
I almost want to think long-term, like, who can I take down in a pressure test but I want to win this challenge, so I'm thinking, "Who could I work with to excel immediately?" All right, Courtney, select your teammate for tonight.
I'm going to choose Elizabeth.
And we're gonna kick ass.
Girls versus the boys.
I get Cutter and boom, there goes my dream.
Turned into a nightmare.
Put them on.
I hate the fact that Leslie is my teammate.
Hopefully, he can take his head out of his ass for two minutes so we can win this.
Leslie, how does it feel now with Cutter? It's fine.
We're going against them.
It's not him and me, 'cause that'll happen if we lose, and I don't think he wants to lose and I definitely don't want to lose.
In the equipment room there are four boxes, one from each of the four states that you come from.
Each team has two boxes to choose from.
Courtney and Elizabeth, your choices will be Pennsylvania and New York.
Leslie and Cutter, your choices will be California and Texas.
Each team has to go into the equipment room and choose one box from one of your home states.
Now, using the box that you choose tonight, each team will have one hour to make us each a restaurant quality appetizer and entree that highlight some of those regional ingredients.
Okay.
Off you go.
Come on.
Let's go, guys.
All right, so what do you think's in your box? It might be more towards the seafood line, and I'm thinking you're more definitely towards - the beef.
- Beef.
The New York box is gonna have stuff from the ocean, 'cause it borders the ocean, and pennsylvania's got a lot of, like, Amish country.
Yes, like lamb and meat.
The steak stuff is more forgiving than seafood.
- I agree.
I agree.
- If we screw up with seafood Probably, I'm more comfortable with the California box, but I don't think it could be that much different in the Texas box.
And at this point, I don't want to start any arguments with Cutter, because if we start fighting, we're not gonna get anything achieved.
Let's do this.
We got it.
It doesn't matter which box we choose, it matters if we can agree on what we're going to cook and stick to it.
Because if you start changing things around, that's when everything falls apart.
Good job.
Well done.
Okay.
Right, ladies, you've gone for the box from the state of Pennsylvania.
Why, Elizabeth? Pennsylvania has a lot of, like, really humble kind of farm fresh ingredients that we felt like we could really elevate.
Right.
Open it up and tell us what you've got in there.
- Let's do it.
- Okay.
Oh.
Wow.
I'm so excited.
There's some Amish cheese.
There's beautiful pears, potatoes, some Polish sausage, rainbow trout.
Venison, apple butter, cabbage.
Do you both feel you made the right choice? - Yes.
- Yes, chef.
Gentlemen.
The state of Texas.
Open your box.
Ready? Looking good.
Cutter, tell us what's in there.
Well, we got a little catfish.
We have a prime rib.
We have baby back ribs.
We have some ancho chili, some molasses, some grapefruit, some corn, and, of course, butter.
Incredible.
Now that you know what you have to cook with, please head to your stations.
A pressure test that is just comprised of me versus Courtney is basically my nightmare.
We need to win so that we don't have to face each other.
It's the final four now, so our standards are higher than ever.
Do those ingredients and those stakes justice.
Yes, chef.
Your one hour Starts Now.
Oh, these pears look amazing.
Yeah.
I want to incorporate them in our appetizer.
Catfish is a trash fish, I mean, it's good, but it's mostly fried, and it's just how do we elevate fried catfish, you know? So the blue team's box is Texas.
They have some well known protein.
What would you do? The catfish is something I would stay away from.
You got to focus on that beef.
It's incredible.
In the red box, I would do a beautiful waldorf salad with a poached trout.
Flavored trout over the waldorf salad, and then entree, that venison.
I mean, get that in a beautiful rub done with some caramelized mushrooms, and grazed with cabbage.
Right, blue team, describe the appetizers.
We're gonna do spare ribs with a grapefruit and molasses barbecue sauce topping and a corn salsa.
Lovely, so something lighter for the entree? I think we're gonna go rib eye.
Right.
Explain the rib eye, please.
Pretty much salt and pepper.
Get a nice sear on it.
Keep it medium rare.
It's a steak, it's nothing more.
What's the garnish? - I'm gonna do a potato, carrot, and turnip puree.
- Good.
Confident you can get through to the top three? Oh, yes.
We're sending those girls home.
I'd love to chitchat, but I got to go.
All right, guys.
What's the dish now? Tell me.
The appetizer is two slices of the trout over a poached pear with an apple butter ginger beer sauce.
You either have to nail that, or it's going to be kind of amateurish and terrible.
What about the entree? The entree is a venison medallion marinated in root beer.
And how you gonna cook them? We're going to pan sear them so they're basically, like, medium rare.
So these are super tiny.
You know how long it's gonna take to sear these in the pan? Not very long.
Good luck.
Red team, blue team, come on, speed up, guys.
Ah! [bleep].
Medic.
Damn it! Cutter.
Come on, speed up, guys.
Ah! Medic.
Damn it! Cutter.
Ah.
I'm chopping my onion, and I just wasnt paying attention and the heel of the knife came down, and I thought I cut my damn finger off.
We're here.
We're here.
We're here.
We're here.
Don't look down.
Look, don't look down.
It's not as bad as you think.
You've taken a nail off, and you're good to go.
Right now, I'm carrying the team.
He's busy with the medics, and I just got to keep moving.
Do or die.
This is do or die.
Living up to your name.
Let's go.
You all right? Uh, yeah, it hurts.
I ain't gonna lie.
This is turning into more of, like, a pear sauce, which I like.
It's really smooth.
It needs a little bit of color.
Like a little bit of cinnamon coriander.
It's not that smooth.
- I don't think that's good at all.
- No? - No.
It tastes weird.
- Okay, what can I do? I mean, why don't we just make an earthy herb mash? Okay, we got to hurry.
I'm hurrying, Cour I mean I know, I'm sorry.
I'm just I'm talking to encourage.
Yeah, I know, but like, I'm [bleep] hurrying.
I get a little impatient with Courtney, because she has a very irritating habit of micromanaging me.
There's a lack of trust there.
You got to get a move on on that.
I really think biscuits would be a good idea.
Make a decision, Cutter.
I can't I'm in the middle of three steaks right now.
I'm not asking you.
I'm just trying to talk to you, man.
We're in the top four, Cutter.
Start acting like a chef.
Make decisions.
No more babysitting.
No more breastfeeding.
Done.
You got any other ideas? Let me take care of my steaks.
Okay.
This is a big deal to make sure it's enough for three people.
Courtney, sometimes things you tell me are [bleep] I already know, And I just need you to tell me things that I don't know.
The little reduction you made with the apple butter and stuff, what's that for, Courtney? The appetizer.
It's already done.
It's been sitting over there for, like, 30 minutes.
Oh, dear.
Right, red team, now, what in the hell's going on? We both made sauces that we didn't know the other one was making for the same thing.
Is this, is this working? Courtney just keeps telling me things I already know, instead of - Well, stand up for yourself, then.
- I know! I told her I wasn't serving that puree, so we're remaking mash.
I mean, the puree sucks.
Um, I could give it to a baby.
I know, I don't like it, but it's That is vile.
We're gonna lose to Leslie and Cutter, and one ofs is gonna go home in a pressure test if we cannot just get past all of the B.
S.
and get the food on the plate.
Ah, this thing needs to reduce.
It's not reducing.
It's all fat.
Fat won't reduce.
Leslie, what did you put in here? There's some steak fat in there.
We're rendering down the bones in wine.
You're not gonna get any liquid out of it.
I'm gonna start over with the red sauce real quick.
Highest temp.
Just get it done.
Don't worry about it.
Just get it done.
Well, no, I'm gonna worry about it, 'cause it doesn't taste good.
Blue team, I'm worried because their sauce that they're "reducing" all fat.
Leslie made that sauce.
Cutter has stepped in to try to save it.
- Put some flour in it.
- I did.
It's just too much wine.
It ain't burned off yet.
Red team, blue team, last two minutes.
Speed up! Let's just get this together, 'cause we're plating together.
Courtney, Elizabeth, you've got to work and talk at the same time.
- Yes, chef.
Heard.
- Whether you like it or not.
'cause you're not gonna finish.
You got the sauce? Yeah, but let's just use very little, 'cause it's very strong.
Let's go, guys.
I think it's absolutely stunning.
Thank you.
- Get them steaks on there.
- Easy, cowboy.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one, and stop.
Hands in the air.
Well done.
Good job.
Right, it's time to find out how you did, starting with the red team.
Please bring up your appetizers.
Elizabeth and I made a rebound from our lack of communication and struggle to work together, and we at least have dishes that we will stand behind 100%.
One of you describe the dish, please.
It's pan seared pelvania rainbow trout with a savory poached pear, amish cheddar, black walnuts, and an apple butter vinaigrette.
First of all, it doesn't look like any appetizer I've seen in any restaurant I've ever been to.
Feels like something left over from a finger buffet gone wrong.
Where was the last time you ate Pennsylvania trout and pear together? - I haven't.
- You haven't.
Elizabeth, maybe? - Uh, I have not, chef.
- No.
It's just a weird combination.
Um, trout actually tastes quite nice.
Cooked briefly, crisp on the skin, but honestly, ladies, just the fact that you were butting heads, it tastes exactly like the performance, underwhelming.
I expect more.
We always say, really, that cheese and fish don't go hand in hand.
The pear looks like it's the star here, and then over here, I have two fish sticks.
Like, where did this come from? We were both just doing things alongside each other and not really coming together as a unit.
So whose dish is this? I'll take ownership for that.
The pear and the sauce and the cheese on its own, could be a nice cheese course.
The fish doesn't make any sense to me.
Really, really surprised.
I appreciate that Courtney fesses up to having thought of the appetizer, but I should've stood up and said, "This pear trout thing is a terrible idea.
I have a better one," but I didn't.
I trusted her and that was so dumb.
Okay.
Blue team.
Appetizer, please.
Walking up to the judges, I'm feeling good right now.
My appetizer plate, I think the ribs look great, cooked perfectly, sauce tastes great.
We might actually have a shot at winning this thing.
Uh, guys, what the [bleep] is that? Uh, guys, what the [bleep] is that? Please describe the dish.
Rack of ribs with a Texas rub with molases glaze and corn onion to go with it.
So visually, restaurant quality, it's not.
I think of some of the dishes you've plated so far on this competition as being really beautiful, but I've never seen such a depressing corn in all my life.
Any citrus in there? Is there any lemon, lime? Uh, salt, pepper.
Well, that's great.
- [bleep] me.
- Hold on a minute.
Thank you.
No, no, seriously.
Chef, there's salt and pepper in the corn.
It sounds delicious.
You know that's not good.
- Who cooked the ribs? - I did.
I pressure cooked them first and then added a little sear on the grill afterwards to give it a little char.
The actual ribs are tender.
Delicious, melting in your mouth, but we're not a barbecue house.
This is the MasterChef kiten.
I don't think you've shown off any of the ingredients properly.
Man.
This is kind of caveman food.
You had, what, 50 different ingredients in that box? You guys used ribs and corn.
What are you thinking? You had rice, quinoa, peppers.
you had the staple pantry.
You could have made a biscuit.
I suggested that, but I never got any info back.
Did you say not to make the biscuit? I never heard a word about any biscuit.
This your recipe? Yummy.
Ribs are good, but we're at the final four.
We ask you to take the spirit of you home state, Texas, elevate that to a restaurant quality dish, I don't know what else to say.
Sorry.
I gave the big Texas man a shot to put down his best dish on the plate, and that was a disaster.
If I go to the pressure test because of Cutter, I'm definitely taking him down.
Red team, entrees, let's go.
Describe the dish, please.
It's seared venison tenderloin medallions over an herbed yukon gold potato mash with sauteed button mushrooms and an apple butter reduction.
Finally some beauty.
Love the idea of the medallions.
Give it a bit of finesse.
- Who cooked the venison? - I did, chef.
And we got a great sear.
Mmm.
Wow.
The cook on the venison, it's perfect.
Thank you.
But this mash, it's like a mouthful of grit.
Lumpy as anything.
Here's the thing, venison, nailed.
Sauce, delicious.
Mushrooms, delicious.
The great shame tonight is the mash.
You nailed the cooking on the venison.
It's very good, it's seasoned well, but the plate definitely wants some sort of veg component, and this is just steak and potatoes, basically, right? Yeah.
And then, what it's missing, for me, is your collaboration.
Yeah.
You're not hitting the stride I would expect for, perhaps, the two best cooks we've ever seen in the MasterChef kitchen, And it's just a little disappointing.
Thank you.
It's not a great review, and it's not our best performance.
We know we didn't cook our best today.
I'm just hoping that Cutter and Leslie screwed up more.
Blue team, entrees, please.
I'm looking at my entree, and I'm happy with it.
I'm hoping that my rib eye and my puree is gonna be a lot better than the ribs.
Tell me exactly what it is.
A rib eye steak with a potato, turnip, and carrot puree with a red wine reduction.
Now, I was watching you guys cook, and I noticed, first thing, you take the bone off.
I always think that's a mistake, 'cause it helps keep it moist.
That said, the fact that you put it in a pan and started using it and cooking with it, I was like, "awesome.
" Is that what ended up being used for the sauce that we saw over on your station? Yeah, I cooked the bones, and then did I glaze - Then you did glaze, okay.
- Yes.
So you've got to render that fat first.
We did all that and then threw it away.
I can't do everything.
I, you know I thought he had it on his corner, and that was that, so So you're guilty with that? - Apparently.
- Wow.
If you can't see the fat in the pan, - I mean, I can't - I did use it.
I had to restart a whole new sauce because there was too much fat.
I let you do your own thing, and this is what happens, so - Really? Okay.
- It is what it is.
Never your fault, is it? Take some responsibility for yourself.
And you told me you got it.
Steak is great.
Good flavor.
The mash, there's too much of it on the plate, and it just needs seasoning.
The hero on that dish is the steak, and luckily, the hero's rocking.
Thank you.
The sear on the rib eye's perfect.
What am I gonna get when I cut this open? Medium rare.
When you got white fat that is raw in the center, it hasn't been cooked long enough.
Rib eye tastes delicious.
Seasoning's delicious.
It's just such a shame that it's undercooked.
Vegetables underneath are embarrassing.
You two are smart, talented individuals.
As a couple, lacking harmony beyond belief.
Thank you.
I love how Leslie tries to throw me under the bus.
We're not meant to work together, and he's gonna do whatever he can to make himself look good and make me look bad.
Red team, blue team, please come round to the front.
Thank you.
Being beat by Cutter and Leslie seems like one of the worst things imaginable, but not as bad as having to face a pressure test against Courtney.
So highs, some lows across that challenge, let me tell you, but one thing that became clearly evident The four of you are incredibly talented home cooks Individually.
We don't get the same standard when paired as a team.
One team was marginally better.
The winning team Is Congratulations The winning team The team that will be safe from elimination tonight and will catapult themselves into the top three Congratulations Red team.
Elizabeth and Courtney.
Well done.
You are through to the top three.
- Thank you.
- Thank you.
Please.
Congratulations.
Head over to the gallery.
- Thank you.
- Thank you.
Sorry, guys.
I know I made it into the top three, and I'm really proud of myself, but I'm disappointed in how I got here.
Elizabeth and I could have won by a landslide, and instead, we won by the skin of our teeth.
Leslie and Cutter, you know what this means.
I'm heading into my sixth pressure test and there is no way in hell that I'm going down without a fight.
I work best under pressure.
I have seven children, five grandchildren.
You want pressure? Put those all in one house.
Every pressure test has been important, but this is personal.
I'm just tired of Leslie's Malibu [bleep].
Old man, it's time to go home.
You're gonna battle head-to-head in a dreaded pressure test, where one will leave at the end of it, and one will join Courtney and Elizabeth in the top three.
Leslie, you survived five pressure tests.
Yes.
Hopefully, I'll survive my number six.
Well, no one's ever gotten to number six, so Do you want to know what? Six is my lucky number.
Today's my sixth test.
I'll survive, and I'll be up there with the girls.
It all comes down to this.
Cutter versus Leslie.
Texas versus California.
The oil man versus the stay-at-home dad.
It's all right.
You can laugh.
I can afford to stay home.
Oh, you're such a joke.
You know what, Cutter? Put it on the plate, mister.
- Let's go.
- Okay? I'm ready to rock and roll.
Texas versus California, I'm loving this.
You know what? It's time to shut up or put up.
In the previous challenge, you chose to cook dishes using ingredients from Cutter's state box, which was from Texas.
For this upcoming pressure test, you'll be using ingredients from the home state box that you rejected.
That's right.
Fine with me.
Let's go.
Please, both of you, go into the equipment room and bring out the California state box.
Yes, sir.
I think that Leslie probably has the upper hand in this challenge.
He has this crazy will and determination, and he clearly has skills, because he's, like, all-time MasterChef global pressure test champion.
I am absolutely betting on Cutter to win this.
He's going to be cooking from his soul and using his brain, and I believe that Cutter can do it.
Carefully, open up the box and see what you missed out on.
I'm happier than a pig in Texas.
I should be familiar with everything that's in this box.
Bring it on.
There you have some amazing ingredients from California.
Exquisite, fresh sea urchin plucked straight from the pacific ocean, jidori chicken, bred and raised in California and sought after by chefs around the world.
Lastly, beautiful, fresh, yellowfin tuna caught right off the coast.
Joe, what are you drawn to in that box? Without a doubt, the sea urchin.
I would take that sea urchin and make a dish that's very close to my culinary heritage Sea urchin risotto.
I love risotto.
I love uni.
Together, they create one of the perfect marriages of land and sea.
I could never pass up a californian sea urchin.
Now, Graham, what are you drawn to? The star of that box, to me, is that jidori chicken.
I'd do a simple preparation honoring the influence Of that Asian culture here in California.
Jidori chicken teriyaki with bok choy and forbidden rice.
It's accented by that sweet, salty combo with soy and honey.
Very, very delicious.
Now, I would fight to get my hands on that delicious, stunning yellowfin tuna.
I would make tuna nicoise.
That's beautiful.
A perfectly seared piece of tuna on a delicious fragrant salad with potatoes, green beans, and a beautiful garnish Soft-boiled quail's eggs, bound together with a light vinaigrette that ties it all together.
Three stunning, beautiful dishes, all inspired from that amazing California box.
Now, this won't be a simple challenge.
Gentlemen, tonight, to get into the top three, you won't simply just replicate one of these dishes.
Cutter and Leslie, you will be replicating all three of these highly sophisticated dishes.
And we are looking for exact replicas.
Wow.
Take my apron now.
I mean, it just You want me to do what? You will have just 90 minutes To make us all three incredibly challenging dishes.
Okay.
Both you, head to your station.
This is gonna be the brawl of the century.
I'm done with the talk.
Talk is cheap.
I can't wait to cut Cutter out of this competition.
Do I want to beat him? Hell yeah, I want to beat him.
Am I good enough to beat him? Of course I am.
My life in the MasterChef kitchen is at stake.
I'm ready.
Let's do it.
Cutter, any last words for Leslie? Nothing at all.
Leslie, any last advice for Cutter? Yeah, I hope he likes Texas.
This is one pressure test that I am dying to witness.
May the best man win.
- Are we ready? - Yes, chef.
Yes, chef.
Your 90 minutes Starts Now.
Let's go, Cutter.
We've never seen a battle as intense as this one.
I mean, get rid of the cooking, it's Ali versus Frazier.
This is their finale tonight.
I really don't care about Leslie right now.
I think everybody knows that I'm a better cook and a better person.
You got it, Cutter.
Come on.
Let's go.
Why don't you come down and help him? Everybody can talk all they want, at the end of the day, you got to walk the walk.
Okay? He's a better cook.
What goes through your head, as a chef, when you have to put up those three dishes in 90 minutes? The big issue tonight is the timing.
The first thing you do is nail the chicken.
Got to get that preparation of the chicken done, 'cause that takes the longest to cook.
Then, number two is the preparation on the yellowfin tuna, the potatoes, and getting the green beans ready.
The last one, the big one, is the risotto.
You start the risotto with literally 25 minutes to go.
The difficulty tonight is plating all those three dishes at the same time.
Just over 25 minutes gone.
Just wait.
Not yet.
Not yet.
Not yet.
Not yet.
Why's Cutter started the risotto? Doesn't make any sense.
It's the last thing that you would do here.
Yeah, over an hour to go.
He's, literally, working backwards.
Oh, this is the worst dish ever.
Cutter.
- What's going on, chef? How you doing? - Good.
So risotto, Please tell me this is a practice one.
Yeah, 'cause I don't ha alue what I'm doing.
Okay.
No.
I mean, I'll be honest, I don't have a clue what I'm doing here.
All right.
Settle down.
Listen.
This is the last thing you want to do.
Right? And it can't hold.
Are you kidding me? We just started, d he's screwing up already? The I'm not That's gonna stir the [bleep] out of me.
This is only the beginning of what's gonna be your end.
Cutter, please tell me this is a practice one.
I don't have a clue what I'm doing.
- Okay.
No.
- I mean, I'll be honest.
I don't have a clue what I'm doing here.
All right.
Settle down.
Listen.
This is something that takes start to finish.
This is the last thing you want to do.
[bleep] and it can't hold.
Don't get stressed out.
Take two minutes out of your 90 to kind of get recentered.
- Yes, sir.
- You can do this.
Halfway, guys.
This is intense.
Each dish, one at a time, no problem at all, but three dishes in 90 minutes, that's scary.
Cutter has got his green beans already cooked for the tuna nicoise.
He's got the rice on, so he's moving.
What about you and your chicken? That is a tough one.
So the big thing is making sure that you don't leave it in the oven and dry it out.
But the difficulty tonight, surely, has to be that teriyaki.
That's the big elephant in the room tonight, 'cause they think it's a glaze, and how that glaze is really important, it's not.
- It's the delicacy of that glaze.
- Exactly.
There you go.
Get an ice bath ready.
Come on.
He's gonna lose, let him lose on his own, not with his mother up there.
- Right, Leslie.
- Yep.
- How are you feeling? - I'm feeling good.
- How's the chicken? - Pretty much done.
I just got to put the teriyaki sauce on it, and we're in the money.
Why do the girls want Cutter in the top three? Because they know they can beat him.
Me? I beat them all.
I beat them already.
So they're nervous.
Yeah, do you think that's what it is? What? Are you kidding me? He's a shoo-in for them.
Get over yourself.
Who's your cheerleaders? Who's my cheerleaders? Me, myself, and I.
- All three of them.
- Right.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.
- There you go.
- That looks good.
It's getting to crunch time.
You got to think tuna, in the nicoise, it's very difficult to pull off.
I mean, from potatoes and green beans, the textures, and then that creaminess of the soft-boiled quail's eggs.
Oh, come on.
Come on.
But for me, the secret is in the tuna.
Searing it long enough on each side, couple of tablespoons of vinegar on top as it cools down It will marinate that tuna.
Who has the edge on the tuna today? Leslie is so organized.
Everything is done a, b, c, d, and it's about assembling it.
My problem with Cutter is the fact that he's slightly manhandling ingredients.
A little bit too clumsy.
Gently.
Oh, come on.
Damn it, Cutter.
Ah, damn it.
Fascinating now, both now starting the risotto.
The trick here is certainly getting the best of luxurious, creamy risotto on your palate.
Each grain of rice perfectly swollen.
Got to stir.
Got to stir.
With the creamiest protein of the sea, which is sea urchin, and it's really just about cream and cream and cream and cream.
His risotto's starting to look good.
That's pretty damn good texas risotto right there.
Cutter is looking like he's really in control right now.
Oh, yeah.
Two minutes remaining.
Got to start plating.
Come on.
Speed up.
We want three dishes replicated.
Focus now.
Finesse.
This is a pressure test times three.
Yeah.
I need all three plates down to the front within the next 75 seconds.
It really is neck and neck now.
Anyone's game.
Let's go.
Get it on.
Get it on.
We can't add any time.
Ten Run, Cutter, run! Move, Cutter.
eight, seven Run.
You got it! six, five, four, three, two, one, and stop.
Hands in the air.
Good job.
Wow.
Oh, I forgot my [bleep] eggs.
Leslie, how you feeling? A little concerned.
I forgot my eggs.
For the nicoise salad.
Could have been plated better.
- Cutter, how are you feeling? - Awesome.
Out of the three dishes, which ones do you think you've nailed? One, two, and three! You're pumped, aren't you? Who's going through to the top three? Me.
For sure.
Let's find out.
I'm feeling great.
I mean, my plates are looking exactly like what the judges put up there.
These big old bear paws did a lot of finesse today.
Okay.
So risotto, one of them definitely has a superior aesthetic.
Leslie, what do you think about his risotto? It looks pretty bad.
All right, let's deal with Cutter's first.
The flavor is very good.
Leslie.
How much wine did you put in here? Uh, I would say about a cup, maybe.
Thanks, guys.
Joe, who had the best risotto? Well One had a better cook on the rice, but was over seasoned.
One was undercooked, but the seasoning was spot on.
The winning risotto Was Leslie's.
Thank you, chef.
I won that hands down.
My risotto looked exactly the way they put it on the plate.
All right, now onto the jidori chicken teriyaki.
It always hinges on taste, But you have to take into consideration the presentation.
Cutter, what's your assessment of the two plates? Visually, I feel like I copied yours probably 90% correct.
And what about Leslie's? Wrong plate.
No sauce.
Bok choy's cut very long, and not a good crust on his chicken.
Cutter, we'll begin with you.
Well, what do you think? I think it looks pretty good.
Leslie, what do you think? Looks dry to me.
Okay.
Well, let's taste.
How long was this in the oven? Maybe 12, 15 minutes.
Leslie.
Yes.
Doesn't seem to have as much of a glaze on it.
- You didn't get that in? - Didn't get it in.
Good job, the both of you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
It's really, really close.
Graham, the teriyaki chicken, who nailed it? Both were overcooked.
One, more than the other.
One person's sauce was the right consistency, the other was missing off the plate.
The best jidori chicken teriyaki Belonged to Graham, the teriyaki chicken, who nailed it? Both were overcooked.
One, more than the other.
The best jidori chicken teriyaki Belonged to Cutter.
- Good job.
Congrats.
- Thank you.
Now it all comes down to the nicoise salad.
I'm sweating a little.
This is it.
Top three or go home.
Uh, Cutter, how did you cook the tuna? I put salt and pepper on it first, let it rest, seared it on both sides and then sliced it.
The tuna, I have a big problem with that.
It's sort of badly seared, dense, raw in the center.
Quail eggs are cooked beautifully.
Potatoes cooked nicely.
You've got so much going for you, but the hero, um, cut badly and delivered in an unfortunate way.
Thank you.
Leslie.
Visually, does that excite you? No, it's kind of thrown on the plate.
And qua's eggs.
- Um, they're in my pot.
- Behind you.
Yes, behind me.
- It looks clumsy.
- Yes.
I agree.
- It doesn't look the most appetizing.
- No, it's not.
Talk to me about the vinaigrette.
It's olive oil, shallots, lemon, and dijon mustard.
Tuna, cooked beautifully.
Vinaigrette, delicious.
Potatoes, slightly overcooked.
Quail's eggs, awol.
Really have two very strong efforts.
This, right now, is neck and neck.
I want to make it to the top three so bad.
I mean, I've came this far.
I know I'm a better cook than Leslie is.
Neck and neck.
One nailed the risotto, one nailed the chicken, and the tuna's even.
If it really comes down to the tuna, Which one do you like better? Cutter's tuna, way undercooked.
- Under? - Way undercooked.
I was a little bit more raw on my tuna, but I thought I nailed chef Ramsey's as far as the look.
Leslie's plate looks like crap.
He didn't even complete the dish.
- Leslie forgot the eggs, though.
- I know.
There's no yolk to add the richness.
Now, visually, it was a mess.
It was all over the place.
Does he have a better looking plate than me? Sure, he's got s little olives over here.
He's got his tomatoes over here.
His tuna looks like [bleep] in the middle here.
So overall, it's about the flavor.
Very, very close.
Okay, ready? This is a very difficult moment for both of you and equally, for us.
The person with the winning nicoise salad The person who is now in the top three of MasterChef Congratulations Leslie.
Thank you, chef.
- Well done.
- Thank you.
You nailed it.
Great seasoning on the vinaigrette.
No quail's eggs.
Big deal.
I can live with that, 'cause the hero of the dish was the tuna.
Congratulations.
Go and join - Congratulations.
the girls on the balcony.
- Congratulations.
- Thank you.
Cutter You have true grit.
You have true determination, and you've done an amazing job.
Thank you.
Cutter, how's the journey been for you? Tell you what, man, it's been a roller coaster.
Uh, I came in here just knowing how to cook a few things really good, but I learned so much from you guys.
You've been brilliant.
I put my heart on the plate every time is all I can tell you.
Every time.
I appreciate everything, man.
Damn, I appreciated Leslie.
That was good competition.
That's all I wanted.
You showed every home cook out there that anything is possible.
Thank you.
Come here, big boy.
Say good-bye.
All right, man.
- Back to Texas.
- Thank you, sir.
Appreciate everything, man.
Appreciate it.
Really, I do.
Chef.
Come here, you.
- I thank you.
- Well, done.
Seriously, well done.
Honestly.
Hey, good luck to you, sir.
My hat's off to you.
You are the better chef.
Well, thank you very much.
I appreciate that.
Thank you.
Take it easy, guys.
Take care, man.
I've represented my family and my friends and my state very well, and I can walk out with my head held high.
I came into MasterChef as a small fish in a big pond Cutter.
Cutter brewer, baby! Yes! and I grew.
Let's go.
Hurry up.
They're waiting.
They're waiting.
Yeah! Thank you! And I got to just work with the three best guys in the industry.
The most beautiful thing that you have put on a plate.
Wow.
Thank you.
You cooked this heart about as good as it could be cooked.
Very, very impressive.
The love and teaching that chef Ramsey gave to me, he never quit believing in me.
You may have a face like a british bulldog chewed a wasp, but you do cook like an angel.
You learn from the past, you live for today, and you dream about tomorrow, and here on MasterChef, I lived the dream.
Cutter brewer, baby! Next week, it's the two-hour MasterChef finale.
as the three best home cooks in America take on the season's most intimidating challenge.
It's a fight for a place in the final two The pressure is on.
I loved it.
I'd put that on my menu.
as the world's biggest cooking competition comes to an end, and a champion is crowned The winner of this year's MasterChef is 
This is the toughest decision that we've made so far.
as two big names Christian.
Cutter.
exited the MasterChef kitchen.
Tonight, it's a two-hour MasterChef with the ultimate culinary title at stake.
The three best home cooks in America take on the season's most intimidating challenge.
representing 50 states.
Wow.
But only two will make the finale.
The pressure is on.
- I loved it.
- I'd put that on my menu.
And the world's biggest cooking competition comes to an end Absolutely spot on.
- It's a knockout.
- It leaves me wanting more.
as this season five MasterChef is crowned.
America's next MasterChef is Welcome.
Oh, my god.
I'm in the semifinals.
This time last year I was cooking in my teeny little electric stove kitchen in Philadelphia with my cat, and now this is my chance to shine.
Courtney, Leslie, and Elizabeth, congratulations.
- Thank you, chef.
- Thank you.
You are the final three in the biggest culinary competition in the world.
This is the semifinal, so as well as winning $1/4 million and your very own cookbook, one of you is only a few dishes away from winning this The coveted MasterChef trophy.
I did a wonderful job taking care of my wife and my children.
My goal now is to do something for me.
That trophy will change my life forever.
For me, that trophy is my ticket to publish my own cookbook, which I've been dreaming of for years.
For this challenge, we want you to cook a special dish for some very special guests.
Each and every one of those guests is perfectly placed to judge your food because each of tonight's guests are all chefs.
- What? - Oy.
We have one amazing professional chef from each and every state in this country Tonight, you have to serve them in the MasterChef restaurant a composed MasterChef-worthy entree.
But prepping and cooking for 50 chefs Come on, it's impossible for you to do it alone.
So tonight we've brought you some help.
Ohh.
I see Willie, Daniel, Ahran, Victoria, Christian, and Jaimee to boot.
I was down in a pressure test with every one of them.
You counted me out.
The old man's still standing.
It's wonderful being back.
Getting the call to come back is totally, like, awesome.
With your future and fortune at stake, there's only really one fair way to decide who you will be working with Fortune cookies.
You'll each randomly take two fortune cookies, and whichever name is inside that fortune cookie will be your sous chefs tonight.
Please, all three of you, come up and take two cookies each.
Courtney, please open one of those cookies and tell us who you have.
- Daniel.
- Good job.
- Stand next to Courtney.
- Thank you.
Hey.
Leslie.
I got what I wished for, Ahran.
- Ahran.
- Wow.
Nice! For some reason, I knew this was gonna happen.
like, something about my fate is always in Leslie's hands.
Elizabeth, please open up one of those fortune cookies.
Jaimee.
- Oh.
- Wow.
- Wow.
- Wow.
Courtney, please open your final fortune cookie.
Big Willie.
Big Willie, wow.
Leslie.
All my dreams come true.
Christian.
Wow.
I know a chef when I see one.
How you doing, brother? Elizabeth, you have Victoria.
Yeah, what's up, yo? Hell yeah.
Get over here.
What are the odds? Now we want restaurant quality, elevated entrees good enough to be eaten by the best chefs in the country.
You will have just 90 minutes to conceive, prep, and plate your stunning dishes.
You are one step away from the finale.
It's all on the line tonight.
Your 90 minutes starts Now.
Christian, let's go down here.
There's gonna be 50 chefs from all over the country in the dining room critiquing our food.
I mean, that's crazy.
I'm doing a prime fillet.
I'm gonna make an herb gnocchi.
Lots of butter.
If you can just get the fish out, I'll meet you over there.
It's a dream come true, but it's also terrifying to cook for that many amazing chefs.
We're gonna make a skin-on pan-seared red snapper fillets with cauliflower three ways and a really awesome Mediterranean relish.
Daniel, have you seen lemon grass yet? If we think it's hard getting anything past Chef Ramsay, chef Elliot, and Joe, it's gonna be 50 times harder getting it past all of these chefs.
We're doing a ginger soy-glazed halibut with a beet dashi, golden beets.
Also doing a chile sauce.
- Get to it.
- Okay.
Let's do this.
I think that's it.
Let's go.
Wow, wow, wow.
- I need a bigger - Bigger pot? I'll go get it.
You need the Japanese turner so you can start this? - He's got it right there.
- Okay.
This is it.
What a big night.
I mean, it's as much pressure tonight as there is in the final.
Come on.
Even for a professional chef, it's a big ask.
No, not there yet.
So Courtney picked halibut with kind of an Asian twist.
If there's one thing chefs hate in the best of times, it's overcooked fish.
Yeah, literally, this fish hangs around - two minutes longer - It's like powder.
- Yeah, it goes to mush.
- Mm-hmm.
Elizabeth's dish, she's doing cauliflower.
It's a glazed pan-seared red snapper.
Very seasonal.
It's a dish that caught my attention.
Leslie picked meat.
He's going with a fillet with gnocchi.
I didn't know why he's put those two together.
- What are your herbs for? - Herb gnocchi.
I think he's looking at the fillet as being a star and then trying to come up with a creative side.
- All right, chives, done.
- Thank you.
This is just the wrong one.
You've now got one hour remaining.
Get organized.
Two minutes from now the chefs are arriving.
- Let's get all of this.
- No, this is more than enough.
Come on, guys, speed up, please.
The chefs are arriving.
Please welcome tonight's judges, some of the greatest chefs in America.
From Mississippi, Cat Cora.
- Oh, my god.
- Oh.
From Maryland, Michael Voltaggio.
From Ohio, Susan Feniger.
From Michigan, Duff Goldman.
Arizona, Suzanne Tracht.
It's like a never-ending parade of famous people that I'm obsessed with.
Representing California, Jet Tila.
Illinois, Mary Sue Milliken.
Oh, my god! From Nevada, Herb Wilson.
This is absurd.
From Missouri, Anthony Carron.
John Sedlar from New Mexico.
Casey Lane from Texas.
Tom Shields from West Virginia.
This is huge.
We're having some of the best chefs in America sitting down waiting to taste our food.
If I don't bring my "a" game today, man, I'm gonna be in trouble.
The pressure is on.
Please welcome tonight's judges, some of the greatest chefs in America.
Wow! It's so incredible.
We are serving 50 chefs from 50 different states.
It's like all of the cookbooks I've been studying from came to life and just walked into the kitchen right by me.
This is amazing.
Seeing my idols walk in oh, my god.
Time to step my game up.
It's like, these people don't even know I, like, worship them, and I'm about to cook for them.
It's amazing.
I just took a picture of you taking a picture.
- It's pretty awesome.
- Very exciting.
Okay, guys, just over 50 minutes until service begins.
- Courtney.
- Yes, chef? Wake up, now, yeah? Describe the dish.
I'm doing Asian ginger soy-glazed halibut with a beet dashi vermicelli.
Quite modern, very vibrant.
Why halibut? Halibut has a really nice, white, flaky meat that will complement my sweet sauce.
- Overcooks easily.
- I know that.
- It'll be very unforgiving.
- Yep.
And even when I get two chefs in my restaurants, you know, it's a big deal.
I've never had 50 chefs.
How're you feeling? The pressure is definitely on, but I'm feeling very confident because I've prepared well, and I know that with good preparation comes good execution.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.
Three, baby, only three.
We don't want to crowd you too much.
Here, take a bite.
Whoa, that's awesome.
So what's the dish, Elizabeth? Tell me.
This is a Mediterranean skin-on red snapper with a watercress puree, a pistachio puree, and cauliflower three ways.
It sounds very contemporary, sounds very restaurant-y.
Is that what you're going for? Absolutely.
Out of the three of us, I have the most restaurant-y, chef-y dish, and I think that's the perfect audience for what I'm cooking.
But is it a good strategy to propose such a chef-y dish to 50 chefs? - Yeah.
- Good luck.
- Leslie.
- Yes, sir.
Tell me what the dish is.
It's an 8-ounce fillet with summer vegetables, herb gnocchi with mushrooms and a demi-glace red wine sauce.
I've never in my life seen fillet and gnocchi mixed together though.
Listen, you told me to reach for the stars.
I'm reaching for the stars.
I'm throwing something down.
- It's very tasty.
- Thank you.
Looks beautiful.
Let's go.
I'm so excited to have these 50 chefs here.
- It's amazing.
- Amazing.
These chefs will decide who wins this challenge and goes straight to the finale of MasterChef.
To you.
I hope that the home cooks do us proud.
Elizabeth's team is amazing, very harmonious.
She's controlling it.
She's dictating the terms, and they are listening.
Jaimee, test that cauliflower for me.
It's really kind of impressive to watch.
Wow.
I turned off the burners.
They're definitely cooked.
Okay.
Daniel, can you get me a fish spatula? Thank you.
Courtney's on the other hand, halibut You don't really start recommending halibut for a large contingent, especially chefs.
It's not the fish you'd give them, is it? No, there's no fat in it.
It goes dry right away.
And then to do it in an Asian style for the first time ever in this competition One more minute.
I think she's playing without a net.
Get the vegetables squared away.
I need the mushrooms cut too.
Leslie is so confident about this dish.
They got to be almost stiff.
Taste them.
- Stiff? - You got it.
This is gonna be incredible.
Taste, taste, taste.
You want a nice texture.
He's just in the driver's seat right now.
They're soft enough for me.
- Way too hard.
Way too hard.
- Incredible.
Gnocchi's done.
What can I do for you? - Set plates up.
- Yeah? If I had to hire one of these three home cooks as a chef in my restaurant today, - it would be Leslie.
- Wow.
- He's on fire.
- Wow.
Watch it.
Ah Careful, careful, careful.
Come on, Leslie.
Watch out, man.
Take it off.
Take your foot off.
Take your foot off.
Take your foot off.
I've got it, Leslie.
I've got it.
Damn, damn, damn.
Sorry.
When it rains, it pours.
Got to start clearing down.
Get organized, lay out the plates.
Count the plates.
Let's go.
Letting down my culinary idols would be unthinkable, So plating is more critical than ever.
So just a little spoonful right in the middle.
let it kind of fall as it will.
Because you are serving it to people who look at every dish with the eyes of a chef.
Beautiful, Ahran, beautiful.
- All right, let's whack it.
- Whack it.
Couple more gnocchi on this plate.
You got it.
Thank you.
Leslie's plating, Elizabeth's plating.
Sauce at the end here.
I got the sauce.
Courtney's got nothing on the plate, bar her name.
Still the same game plan with the plating? - Daniel.
- Yes, chef? Is anyone gonna start plating? - I'm getting directions.
- Yes, sir, getting directions.
But is anybody gonna start plating? The noodles are ready.
You want them start going - Courtney! - Yes, chef.
Is anybody gonna start plating? I'm telling him to start plating right now.
We need to step up a gear, guys.
We're going right now.
Guys, don't forget, in the restaurant we have a chef from every state in America.
Let's go, guys.
Come on.
All of you, speed up.
Courtney's got no plates dressed.
We got 12 minutes to go.
All I need to hear is what goes in the vermicelli.
I keep telling you it's all of the noodles and the sauce.
Here, you do it yourself.
Willie and Daniel, do you have any idea what's going on? That's what I'm trying to get details on, chef.
I've said it more than enough times.
- Say it again.
- So let's do that right now.
- Oh, my god.
- Make it happen.
Make it happen.
- I did what you told me to do.
- Okay.
Eight minutes to go.
- Do it.
- You don't wanna toss it in the broth? Get going.
No, just get going.
- Put the noodles down.
- Come on.
We got to get it on the plate, okay? We've got to get it on the plate.
Okay, keep it cool.
This is my worst nightmare coming to life.
Finish all of them.
Oh, my goodness, me.
This is insane.
Eight minutes to go.
With time running out in tonight's semifinal challenge, the final three home cooks must conceive and cook a restaurant-quality dish for in the country.
We're looking for flavor.
We're looking for presentation.
This is MasterChef, and althou ty're home cooks, I'm looking for raw talent.
I'm expecting culinary magic, and I came here hungry.
Last two minutes.
Make it happen.
Make it happen.
- I did what you told me to do.
- Okay.
This is insane.
You don't wanna toss it in the broth? - Do it and get going.
- No, just get going.
- Put the noodles down.
- Come on.
We gotta get it on the plate, okay? - Don't start yelling now.
- We got to get it on the plate.
Okay, keep it cool.
My name is on the plate.
It doesn't say "Daniel" or "Big Willie.
" It says "Courtney.
" Sauce.
There's no sauce on that one.
We got to do sauces.
Willie, get the the red sauce is right in front of you.
Turn around.
There's no fish on this one.
And I'm not okay with how they look.
This looks like crap.
All right, let's push it out.
Looking good, you all.
Let's go, guys.
Come on! Ooh, watch out, watch out.
Ten, nine, eight - Let's go! - Seven, six Come on! - Five - Come on, you guys.
Four, three, two, one.
And stop.
Hands in the air.
Here come the servers.
Really careful, guys, 'cause they're stacked pretty tall.
Gentle, like a lover.
Gently.
Wow, wow, wow, wow, wow.
The fillet came out beautifully.
The gnocchi looks great.
Everything looks perfect.
Courtney, Leslie, and Elizabeth, Please say good-bye and thank you to your sous chefs.
Bye, you guys.
- I'm so sorry for - It's okay, honey.
- Bye.
- See you soon.
Love you.
Bye, you guys.
Having my dream team by my side was amazing, but at the end of the day, this is my plate.
I own it.
I'm proud of it, and I'm hyper-confident.
Okay, Elizabeth, Leslie, and Courtney, I'd like all three of you to come with us into the MasterChef restaurant and explain to our 50 chefs from 50 states what you've cooked for them tonight.
Let's go.
As an aerial dancer, I've been on a stage in front of huge audiences for most of my life, and I'm starting to feel scared right now.
Ladies and gents, chefs, first of all a great honor it is to have you all here.
First ever in the history of this competition that we can get such an elaborate array of talent in one room.
Courtney, describe your dish please.
Tonight I have prepared for you a pan-seared halibut that I've glazed with ginger and soy.
Beneath that is a beet dashi vermicelli and surrounding the plate is a guero chile sauce.
Looks good.
- Thank you.
- Leslie, please.
My plate tonight is a 8-ounce fillet that was pan roasted with a herb gnocchi, and some summer vegetables, and a wine reduction.
Elizabeth, please.
I've made for you a pan-seared skin-on red snapper with cauliflower three ways, harissa-roasted white cauliflower puree, and a purple cauliflower couscous, and a little pistachio puree.
Great.
Courtney, Leslie, Elizabeth, please head back in to the MasterChef kitchen while these amazing chefs taste your dishes.
Please, look at the dishes.
Break it down.
Reward creativity, flare, imagination, and of course, obviously, it's about the taste.
Enjoy, and a big thank you again for making the effort to be here.
Oh, my god, I want to know what they're saying in there.
Ugh.
They're probably loving the idea of your cauliflower couscous.
Being a seafood chef, my first and foremost is gonna be the fish, but she's also taken that same attention to the vegetables.
She really did do cauliflower three ways.
She's got three different textures, three different preparations, three different colors, three different flavors.
Every single component works separately, and it works together.
Could use a little bit of seasoning, but you can taste the cauliflower.
So you kind of went, like, an Asian flavor profile.
That's interesting.
Yeah, the judges kept saying to me, "What haven't you shown us?" So I was like, "I'll show you Asian.
" Courtney did a good job cooking the fish.
- The halibut's cooked nice.
- Mm-hmm.
I do like this flavor of the broth on the noodles.
Very sophisticated.
You could have this in an upscale restaurant.
She knocked it out of the park with that dish.
It could use more sauce.
When I heard you were doing gnocchi for that many people I was like, "This man has gone insane.
" Mine seemed fine.
Everything, the gnocchi held up.
It was tough though.
Although steak is safe, gnocchi's not safe.
It's a gamble to try to cook a gnocchi for not just chefs, but for anybody.
Flavor-wise, it's delicious.
It's seasoned.
The meat is cooked perfectly.
This would be a dish I'd order in a restaurant, like, beef and mushrooms and red wine, classic combination.
There were, like, good elements, but it's kind of it's a little disjointed.
I have to say, this is my choice right here.
Yeah, I would agree.
I-I definitely think Elizabeth stole the show, yeah.
I'd sell this dish in my restaurant.
I'm gonna go with Leslie.
Things are cliches for a reason.
Is it culinary genius? Maybe not.
I loved it.
Courtney look how beautiful this is.
Look at that.
Perfect.
- There you go.
- Thank you.
Thank you so much.
Perfect.
Wow.
When I walk in and I see the chorus line of amazing chefs, they are going to send someone right into the finale.
The home cook that we'd like to invite down here My dish should beat Leslie and Elizabeth's because it's original.
It's showing chef-like qualities.
The individual with the dish of the night I need to win.
I need to get up on that balcony and be number one, or otherwise I don't know.
Another pressure test, number seven? I mean, come on, really? Congratulations goes to Wow.
The individual with the dish of the night, Congratulations goes to Elizabeth.
Amazing.
I am so happy.
I get to walk through the hallway of chefs.
I'm in the finale, and I am thrilled beyond words.
Well done.
Please, head up to the balcony.
There's a very cool glass of champagne waiting for you.
Great job.
Leslie and Courtney, please make your way down.
On behalf of everybody here at MasterChef, I'd like to say a big special thank you to our talented chefs standing behind you.
Much appreciated.
Hope to see you again.
Thank you.
So now it's between me and Courtney.
I am psyched about this.
I'm not gonna let anything get in my way, and I'm gonna get this thing done.
All right, Courtney and Leslie, well done.
Tough challenge tonight.
Unfortunately, not in the same league as Elizabeth.
Now both of you will perhaps the most grueling and the most important pressure test you've ever done in this competition, where only one of you will join Elizabeth in the grand final of MasterChef.
Next time we see you, it's gonna be intense.
There have been seven other people who have tried to send Leslie home in the pressure test, and they've failed.
This is my chance to send him back to Malibu.
Today I'm going into the biggest battle of my life.
I can do this.
I can make this happen.
I will be in the finale.
Welcome.
Good to see you both.
Come on down, please.
Elizabeth is the first person to be catapulted into the MasterChef finale.
The task now is to find out which one of you two will be facing Elizabeth.
In a previous challenge, we had you make an incredibly complex composed entree.
Now it's time for dessert, but not just any dessert.
Three desserts that celebrate the greatness of America, the united cakes of America.
First up, you have something that I am very familiar with, a proud staple of my hometown New York cheesecake.
Ooh.
Tangy, rich, cheese filling.
Nestled in a crisp graham cracker crust, topped with a beautiful strawberry coulis.
Next up From the great state of Florida, we have key lime pie.
Tangy, smooth, bursting with fresh flavor, and it's all about balance, Sweet versus tart.
Next up, you have another great American regional dessert.
From the great state of Massachusetts, you have a delicious Boston cream pie.
Two gorgeous layers of sponge with a phenomenal cream filling between them, and then the whole thing is covered in a stunning chocolate ganache.
This is a tall order for anybody, and for someone who doesn't bake, this is a nightmare.
Courtney, Leslie, any last words for each other? If she wins fair and square, fine with me, but I'm not going down sleeping, that for damn sure.
Now it's time to head to your stations.
You have two hours to make us all three incredibly challenging desserts from different parts of this great country.
You all have everything that you need to make these three difficult desserts.
Bake better than you've ever baked before, because if you don't, it will be the last time you'll be making anything here in the MasterChef kitchen.
Your time starts Now.
So Leslie's seventh pressure test tonight.
Wouldn't that freak you out if you were Courtney? We've always known she's a baker, so she got the luck of the draw.
Yeah, but, I mean, Leslie's excelled too, so it's not like one-sided, like she was given an advantage with this.
No, but tonight's all about nerves of steel.
One mistake, and they're out.
You have to cook with composure.
I'm freaking losing time right now.
I'm gonna beat Leslie because I've been baking cakes forever.
I love baking cakes.
This is one of my favorite things to do.
I can see myself in the finale already.
Months ago, it would take them two hours to do one cake.
Tonight, we're asking them to do all three in two hours.
What cake has to go first? Get that cheesecake in the oven immediately because you haven't got time.
It's the longest cook time? - It's an hour to cook.
- An hour? An hour to cook.
and then cool.
I got to get moving, man.
After that, start tackling the Boston cream pie - 'cause that sponge - got to bake the sponge.
Oh, man, that is a difficult one.
Then from there, start on the easiest one I think, which is the key lime.
Right, you have to have that lime zest and you want that acidity to come through.
But the cheesecake is the big one that needs to go in the oven within the first 20 minutes.
- Oh! - Sorry.
Just keep this going, Courtney.
Keep it going.
Right, Courtney, how are you feeling? Oh, I'm feeling incredible.
Cheesecake's in? Cheesecake is in, chef.
Now, you look composed.
You look together.
Can you do this? Absolutely.
I can totally do this.
This is what I love to do.
I've never seen anyone so happy in a pressure test.
- I know.
- Are you okay? Yeah, I'm great.
I'm not just a girl wearing high heels.
I'm a girl that can cook.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.
Spoons, spoons, spoons, spoons, spoons.
Gorgeous.
Let's keep this going.
I notice Courtney talking herself through the challenge.
You got to fold it gently.
Yes.
She's like, "It looks beautiful.
Now I just have to put the cream of tartar in.
" Beautiful.
Yes.
"Yes, it looks beautiful.
" Leslie talks to himself too, but he's like, Hey, what do I gotta put the Eh, I got the cream of tartar, and I got thethe gotta whip the lemon meringue.
" Mmm.
It's like you feel, like, seven separate voices talking to him in his own head.
Shh-shh-shh.
Leslie, how we doing? - Not doing so good.
Not doing so good.
- What's wrong? No, not doing so good, man.
- This is not my strength, man.
- Look, I know.
You just gotta slow down, take a breath.
which cake is that? This is the cheesecake.
Courtney's cheesecake is cooked already.
Yeah, because she's she's a baker, you know? She's done.
It's cooked.
Yes, I understand.
You want to know what? Why are you so far behind? 'Cause I don't do this.
This is not my forte.
The timing of the cheesecake leaves you no net.
No.
No net whatsoever.
And it might not even cool down in time.
I am so frazzled.
I got too many things going through my head.
Got to get this thing in the oven or otherwise I'm gonna be screwed.
Unless there's a miracle, this cheesecake is not gonna cook.
The party might be over.
Still to come tonight It's the MasterChef finale.
But which of these home cooks will battle Elizabeth for the MasterChef title? America's next MasterChef is Which cake is that? This is the cheesecake.
This is not my forte.
This is not one of my strengths.
It does set you behind a little bit.
Yes, it does.
Do you have any progress on the other cakes, here you just been doing this? Yes, I do.
No, I just gotta get - I got to get it first.
- Slow down, slow down, slow down.
You got to relax a little bit.
No, I can't.
You know, I'm always on the verge of a nervous breakdown, but I'm not going there.
Lady, who's your daddy? Leslie is a bit all over the place.
He just put the cheesecake in.
We're not even sure if there's enough time to cool it down.
Leslie has fallen behind on the cheesecake.
He may be trying to make up for the other two.
So key lime pie is the simplest, but also really there's a balancing act between sweet and sour.
How do you manage that? If it's too acidic, then you add more sugar.
If it's too sweet, then y you need to add a little bit more citrus.
So you've got to find that balance.
The Boston cream pie is a difficult one.
The secret in the sponge is the aeration, incorporating those eggs and the butter and the sugar.
What's a perfect Boston cream? That is the base of a great pastry cream, but again, too heavy in that, they can split the sponge.
Leslie's pulling his cheesecake out.
But the big question tonight is: is Leslie's New York cheesecake - cooked? - Right.
Let's go.
Okay, I need to get my cheesecake, and I can finish the cheesecake, and everything will all be good in the world.
Time's a ticking.
I'm taking a licking, but guess what.
These are done, so I'm happy about that.
Oh, my cheesecake is gorgeous.
Courtney, how we doing? I'm doing so good.
How does it feel to be in here now? I mean, the semifinal? This is how I want to do this, this is how I want to enter the finale.
This is just me versus Leslie in the kitchen.
This is how I want to win it.
Awesome.
Good luck.
Thank you, chef Elliot.
Look at Leslie go.
Come on, come on, come on, come on.
That looks good.
Oh, he's gonna drop it if he's not careful.
Palette knife.
Palette knife, Leslie.
It will fall off.
It'll slide off.
So tarts are both done.
Cheesecakes are both done.
Now it comes down to the Boston cream pie.
Courtney's just taken her sponge out.
But you can see Leslie right now.
He had these nice, beautiful ones.
It's not gonna be from a lack of trying, that's for freaking damn sure.
You can start to see the stress on Courtney's face.
Yeah.
It's really low right there.
Winning this pressure test is your ticket right to the finale, and Leslie probably has the upper hand just by virtue of the fact that he's been through so many pressure tests.
I mean, it's like his second job at this point, and he seems to be coming back.
Gentle, baby, gentle.
Gentle, gentle, gentle.
Less than 15 minutes to go.
Now is gonna be the most exciting, 'cause that's when they have to start assembling them.
And you just visually will know whether you're going home or going to join Elizabeth in the finale.
Leslie's about to start filling his Boston cream pie.
looks good.
Wow.
Yeah, pastry cream looks nice.
Oh, my god.
- That looks amazing.
- Oh, no.
Oh, my gosh, she's putting it in directly.
Just got to do it like this.
Oh, no.
Courtney's cakes look a little uneven.
Like, her pastry cream is oozing out from the middle.
Right now, Courtney is completely falling apart.
Last five minutes.
Son of a bitch.
He's a mad man.
Last minute, guys.
finishing touches, please.
Come on, place in the final for one of you.
Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
And stop.
Hands in the air.
Good job.
Courtney's cheesecake looks like you googled the perfect cheesecake.
It is completely flawless.
So the knife is going through very nicely.
It's nice and smooth.
Okay, here we go.
How does that look? I think it looks delicious.
The crust is crispy.
The cream cheese cake itself is light, airy, rich, smooth.
- Very good.
- Thank you.
- Okay, Leslie.
- Yes.
Less aesthetically appealing, but, as we say, it's all about the taste.
Ooh.
Yes, it looks a little See, that looks super creamy, super, like - Yes, right there.
- Raw.
Let's taste it though.
The graham cracker crust is a littleis burnt.
Tastes like burnt chocolate chips cookies.
You know that flavor? Yeah, yeah.
- Thank you very much.
- Thank you.
Given the circumstances, I would say you both did a pretty good job with those cheesecakes.
Thank you.
One looked much more like the cake we were asking for and tasted closer to what we were expecting.
The best cheesecake tonight belongs to Courtney.
- Congratulations.
- Thank you.
Courtney, what do you think? I was a little overexcited with the blow torch.
Yeah, looks like key lime s'mores.
- It's very sweet.
- Okay.
You know, with key lime pie, I love that sharp Tartness.
Acidic tang coming through, and this is it's almost obliterated.
The only lime I'm really getting is from the zest over the top.
Okay.
All right, so, Leslie, anything I should know about this? Uh, no, this one I kind of, uh, hit it on the mark.
The flavor's awesome.
It's got that zing to it.
The curd baked perfectly, great texture.
You nailed it.
Great job.
Thank you, chef.
Key lime pie, with everything, it comes down to the details.
The winning key lime pie belongs to Leslie.
Great job on that key lime pie.
Thank you, chef.
I definitely won the key lime.
Now we got to go to the Boston cream.
Whoever wins this is going into the finale.
I'm watching this pastry cream ooze out the sides, and I'm just seeing myself walking out of the MasterChef doors.
So it comes down to the Boston cream pie.
Courtney.
Courtney, Courtney, Courtney.
I know.
I'll just have a little look at that.
Mine's quite even on the top, at least I'm not talking about the unevenness.
I'm talking about the slurry and the sludge That's oozing out of yours.
That should be stuck together.
Thank you.
- Uh, Leslie.
- Yes, chef.
Lovely ratio.
Sponge slightly too thick, but nice density of pastry cream inside.
Wow.
Thank you.
Please, Courtney, Leslie, come around to the front, thank you.
We now have to work out which one of you moves on to the MasterChef grand finale.
Please, give us a minute.
Thank you.
- Courtney is a mess.
- Yeah.
There's no creamn the, is there? Boston cream pie is about the cream.
Yeah, it's like a liquid center cake.
Leslie's had a great pastry cream.
There's something really weird tasting at the bottom.
It's like a weird bread.
He needed a little more sugar or something? Yeah, I think that probably is what's wrong with it.
- Something major.
- Mm-hmm.
It all comes down to the Boston cream pie, and it seems like Leslie's has the edge.
All right, Courtney, You had highs and lows, insufficient pastry cream, pastry cream slightly liquid, top heavy, it terms of, good ganache, lovely sponge.
Leslie, visually incredible, great pastry cream, ganache delicious, but something very odd came to mind whilst tasting the sponge.
Why don't you just have a taste of that, please.
Do you know what's wrong with that sponge? You put the salt in place of the sugar.
I may have, yes.
The home cook who made the best Boston cream pie and the person who will now move into the MasterChef finale and face-off against Elizabeth, that person is Courtney.
Oh, my god.
Congratulations.
You did an amazing job.
I tried.
I made a simple mistake.
Not a problem.
Thank god.
I was certain that I was going home.
Wow.
I feel bad for Leslie.
It was such an honest mistake.
Seven pressure tests.
Finally one got you.
Yeah, and you know what? I figured my luck kind of ran out after six, but she just happened to knock me off my pedestal.
Everyone in America who's ever baked more than one cake, including myself, has made the same exact mistake that you made tonight.
Leslie, you have been phenomenal.
And for anybody out there that ever tells me again that cooking is a young man's game, you've turned that around on its head.
Thank you, chef.
Come and say good-bye, big man.
Thank you very much.
It was a pleasure meeting you guys.
You guys are my idols.
Right, two talented individuals.
Who is your money on? I'm sorry, Courtney, but I would definitely put my money on Elizabeth.
Thank you, Leslie.
- Thank you again, chef.
- Well done.
All right.
I'm the stay-at-home dad that came here to win, and I was doing a pretty damn good job up until the salt part.
This is a great looking pie.
You really nailed it.
Awesome dish.
You're up at the top right now.
All of you, right now, get your ass down here quickly.
That's what I call a box of donuts.
Wow.
I learned a lot.
I mean, I didn't expect to make it this far.
I met interesting people.
Some liked me.
Some didn't like me.
I can hear you.
I don't need to look at you.
I need you to look at me! You're not sorry at all! I did not expect to work out my differences with this young lady.
Not only are you becoming a better cook, you're also becoming more likable somehow.
You're my idol.
I love you, man.
I love you too, Leslie.
Outside of getting married and having my children being born, this has to be one of those great things in my life that I will remeer fever.
Right now It's the MasterChef finale.
The world's biggest cooking competition comes to an end Whoo! as Elizabeth and Courtney go head-to-head What do you think of Courtney's dessert? It looks like second place.
for the most coveted crown in the culinary world.
Only one will walk away with $1/4 million Give me my knife, baby.
It's on.
their own cookbook Winning would change everything.
and the MasterChef title.
America's next MasterChef is Welcome to the finale of the biggest culinary competition of the year.
Tonight, the best two home cooks in America will battle it out here in the MasterChef kitchen.
Only one will be crowned MasterChef.
In our search for the absolute best home cook in this country, we went to every corner of this great nation.
MasterChef! The best home cooks in America entered the MasterChef kitchen all united by their passion for food.
You are the top 22.
They were faced with ferocious challenges.
You got 60 guests, the bride and groom, and they're waiting! Hut! I need you on the grill! You're not sorry at all! I'm not gonna stand here and be abused.
Some wilted under intense pressure.
- I need a medic.
- Medic.
Quick! You brought us a dish that you didn't make.
- Others rose - Whoo! Growing stronger with every obstacle.
You're playing the game at a high level.
But to crown the best, we had to find the best.
The person leaving MasterChef tonight is Christian.
Cutter.
Leslie.
Now there are only two home cooks remaining.
Tonight, they will do battle head-to-head in the greatest kitchen in America, but only one will survive what they're about to endure.
Only one will become America's next MasterChef.
The first finalist is Elizabeth A 31-year-old advertise executive from Brooklyn, New York.
I grew up in the South, and I spent my entire life obsessing over moving to New York.
I work in advertising, and I enjoy my career, but I'm so ready to win MasterChef and change my life.
This is the last apron.
- After a quiet start - Congratulations.
Elizabeth soon rose to become one of the most consistent competitors in the MasterChef kitchen.
The winning mystery box dish Elizabeth.
From savory to sweet, comfort food to exotic global flavors - Whoo! - Elizabeth mastered them all.
Wow.
This is like taking a trip to Italy.
Elizabeth has made MasterChef history The blue team, ladies and gentlemen.
Having never lost a team challenge.
I'm going to turn this finale into the key that unlocks my culinary dreams.
This is the most important day of my life.
She hasn't cooked in a single pressure test.
Tonight, can Elizabeth handle the pressure of this finale? The only hurdle that stands in Elizabeth's way is Courtney A 25-year-old from Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
It's very hard for me to talk about this.
I've done things that I'm not proud of.
Not being able to pay my rent, I make the difficult, embarrassing decision to work in a gentlemen's club.
But cooking is the start of a new beginning.
I'm gonna do something else that I love and have so much passion for.
I want to make my family so proud.
Courtney made her mark when she became the very first home cook to win a white apron.
- Beautifully done.
Great job.
- Thank you.
She impressed us with her sophisticated European flavors and techniques.
You could taste the love that went into that.
As the pressure intensified Courtney, I hope you're joking.
I did that.
She began to stumble.
They're salty.
Eh.
I'm sorry, chef.
But she always managed to step back up to the plate.
Amazing.
You definitely got mojo back.
I want to change my life around, and winning this title is what changes everything.
A win tonight would take Courtney's talents to a very different stage.
Elizabeth and Courtney, congratulations on making it here to the MasterChef finale.
And here to cheer you on are all of your past competitors that you beat to get into this finale.
It's been a long time that you've been on this journey with us.
You've sacrificed so much, especially leaving all of your loved ones back home.
Elizabeth, what do you think that they'd say about you right now being here in the finale? How proud they are of me.
Let's find out exactly what they would say.
Please welcome your family and friends from Brooklyn: Your husband Ross, your mom Melissa, your brother Seth, your friends Janine, Jess, and Sarah.
Oh, my god.
Melissa, Elizabeth's under immense pressure tonight.
Any words of encouragement? Cook your ass off.
Courtney, it's been a long time.
How much do you want to see your family? I want to see my family so bad.
They want to see you even more.
Here they are.
Hey.
Your mom Lisa, your dad Dennis, sister Collette, Connor, your brother, and your other brother Colby.
Oh, my goodness.
Look at you.
Is Cooper here? Now we're complete, right? Captain Cooper, any final words of encouragement you'd like to say to your big sister? Good luck.
Thanks, baby.
You guys are such an inspiration for these two amazing home cooks.
But now it's time to say good-bye and head up to the gallery.
Bye.
Love you.
Overcome adversity.
Love you, baby.
Hey, you are the best.
For tonight's challenge, we want one appetizer, one entree, and one dessert.
Three identical plates of each course, One for each of us.
After you're done cooking each course, you'll serve your dishes to us in the MasterChef restaurant where we'll taste your dishes and make some very critical decisions.
You'll each have ten minutes in the MasterChef pantry to get everything you need to cook us the best three-course meal of your entire lives.
Your ten minutes in the pantry starts Now.
I want Elizabeth to win.
She's an excellent cook.
Unless she screws up, I'm seeing her win the whole kit and caboodle.
You can't possibly count Courtney out.
Courtney works good under pressure.
Elizabeth is the terminator, and she's gonna shut Courtney down.
She has to.
It is her fate to stop Courtney.
Somebody has to stop Courtney.
If it was my money on the line, Courtney got it.
Wow.
Here we go.
First up, your appetizer course.
Elizabeth.
I'll be making a grilled octopus with a warm chorizo and chickpea salad.
And Courtney, what will you be making for your appetizer tonight? I will be making a crispy pig's ear with dandelion and fennel salad and a quail egg.
You'll both have one hour to make us those stunning appetizers.
Ladies, your time starts Now.
Come on, ladies! - Let's go, you guys.
- Whoo! - Yeah, Courtney! - Let's go, sis.
Elizabeth should definitely be worried.
I'm not afraid of Elizabeth.
This is my battle to win, and it's go big or go home.
Come on, Elizabeth! There are no heels in the kitchen anymore.
It's knives, and it's time to do battle.
Let's do this.
Come on, ladies! In this season's MasterChef finale, Elizabeth and Courtney are battling it out over a three-course dinner that they'll serve to the judges.
For their appetizers, Courtney's dish features a crispy pig ear salad with fennel and a quail egg, while Elizabeth has chosen to make grilled octopus with fennel, chorizo, and chickpeas.
Looking good.
All right.
This is it the battle we've all been waiting for.
Elizabeth's appetizer, for instance, tonight A delicious-sounding braised octopus.
She's cooking it in the pressure cooker.
If she's off by even five minutes, we could be eating rubber bands.
Courtney is going out of the box.
Courtney made a pig ear.
Seriously, pig's ear salad? Pig ears are, like, They used to be dog chews.
If you don't understand how that ear breaks down, you're gonna be left with a mouthful of cartilage.
But if you get that right, and you cook it beautifully, it's gonna be the dish of the night.
She's taking the biggest chances I've ever seen a finalist take.
- Yeah, Courtney.
- Whoo! How you doing, Courtney? Hey.
I'm doing really good.
We've been through so many seasons of MasterChef, we've never seen pigs' ears in a finale.
Are you taking too much of a risk here tonight? No, I'm sending a strong message.
Elizabeth should be very scared.
Good luck.
I'm excited to try that.
Thank you, chef.
I'm definitely interested in Courtney's menu.
I mean, the pig ear, I think it's a very awesome, Trendy way to go, but it's definitely a risk.
It's a very hard dish to elevate.
Go, Elizabeth.
- Right, how you feeling? - Good, chef.
Describe your appetizer.
I'm doing a grilled octopus with a warm chorizo and chickpea salad.
Why octopus? There's nothing more impressive than that, and I want to start you on a Mediterranean journey.
Pressure cooker.
How you feeling? - It's always a little bit of a hope and a prayer.
- I know.
You just got to wait for the last minute.
Quickly cleaning it, grilling it, getting it on the plate.
It's dangerous, but I'm gonna do it.
I'm just amazed that you're leaving this to the very last minute because literally The octopus is not cooked yet.
Courtney started to plate.
Are you running behind? No, chef, I'm gonna have everything plated and do the octopus at the very last minute.
You are so daring.
Good luck.
Thanks, chef.
I think Elizabeth has the better menu.
The octopus now, that's a challenge.
If you nail it, boom, she's a shoo-in.
Oh, god.
Last ten minutes.
Let's go, ladies.
Courtney's strategy is working.
She put the full-court press on Elizabeth, and I think Elizabeth is beginning to buckle under the pressure.
Elizabeth, you've got to move faster.
- Yes, chef.
- Please.
Okay.
Here's the octopus.
Looks good.
Let's go.
You've got to start plating, Elizabeth.
This food is very beautiful.
Exciting.
Oh, my god.
Yeah.
Let's go! Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
Hands in the air! Now, please bring your dishes down to the front.
Thank you.
Courtney, what do you think of Elizabeth's octopus salad? The plating's a little haphazard, but it's okay.
Elizabeth, what do you think of Courtney's pig's ear salad? The pig ear maybe looks a little beige.
Well, we will be the judges of that.
Both of you, please follow us into the MasterChef dining room.
Let's go.
It doesn't matter what anyone else thinks.
It's all in the judges' hands now.
Elizabeth, please present your appetizers, thank you.
I'm taking a huge risk with this octopus.
It's not something that I cook at home all the time, but today, in the finale, big risk, big reward.
Elizabeth, describe your dish, please.
This is a grilled octopus with a warm chickpea and chorizo salad with a piquillo pepper and heirloom tomato sauce.
So I was concerned with the octopus in the pressure cooker, but I have to say that this octopus Looks better than I would have ever imagined.
This is truly an octopus that I can eat with my eyes.
Thank you.
I very much like the grill portion of the octopus, but I think that you may have slightly overcooked the octopus.
But overall, very punchy, very Mediterranean, very, very strong dish.
- Thank you.
- The flavors are great.
I think that it's aggressively spiced and seasoned, which you've always done throughout the competition.
I think that that shows confidence in your cooking.
You know, if we received it in a restaurant, I think we'd all be pretty happy with it.
Thank you.
Well, visually the dish is so appealing.
When you're using all those spices with those chickpeas, then you got this perfect foundation for that octopus to sit on the top.
Great flavor on the char.
Love that flavor.
Amazed you got it done in that short period of time.
Bold move, difficult to pull off.
You did just that.
Good job.
Thank you, chef.
Courtney, it's time to taste your appetizer, please.
You've got a very high bar to reach.
Courtney, describe your appetizer, please.
A crispy pig's ear over a dandelion and fennel salad with a quail egg and a guajillo chili sauce.
Is a salad with some fried pig ears enough for an appetizer in the biggest cooking competition in the world, is the question that I'm asking myself.
I believe so.
I believe that the dish is well-balanced.
You might believe that.
I'm asking myself that.
- Oh, sorry.
I thought you were - I'm not sure.
Is a salad with some fried pig ears enough? I believe so.
I believe that the dish is well-balanced.
You might believe that.
I'm asking myself that.
- Oh, sorry, I thought you were - I'm not sure.
It's a typically Courtney plate.
It's meticulous, but just a little bit soulless.
Well, it's a really assertive, opinionated dish.
The pigs' ears were very good.
Crispy, salty, rich.
You have a great balance between acidity, heat, oil, and it's certainly one of the most well-dressed salads that I've eaten in recent history.
Thank you, sir.
I love the guajillo pepper sauce.
It's explosive, and it goes great with the rich quail egg.
Tastes great.
Thank you.
Visually it looks elegant.
Pig's ear cooked perfectly.
Shocked them, it sort of solidified all the fat.
The way you treated them was brilliant.
You deliver a punch with flavor.
Great job.
Thank you.
Ladies, you are clearly on another level, and we have some very important things to discuss.
Please prep for the entrees.
Thank you very much.
- Yes, sir.
Thank you.
- Thank you.
Thanks, guys.
Thank you.
Wow, I mean, Elizabeth, great octopus.
I mean, the flavor, delicious.
Yes, it was slightly overcooked, but technically, she pulled it off.
Courtney, out of nowhere, picks a pig ear.
It was a bold, bold statement.
- That's as gutsy as it gets.
- Brilliant.
Two more courses yet to come, so there is lots of culinary gamesmanship still to come to this table for us to taste.
Okay, it's time to get started on your entrees.
You will each have 60 minutes to make us the best main course that you have ever made in your entire life.
Your 60 minutes starts Now.
How do you follow those appetizers? Well, that's the thing is, sometimes after the appetizer you have a clear leader.
- Right now, it's neck and neck.
- Neck and neck.
They're at ground zero again.
Come on, Elizabeth.
For my entree, I'm making spiced lamb and quinoa saute with a carrot puree and a mint yogurt sauce.
Serving the judges an overcooked or undercooked rack of lamb is not gonna fly, so I just need to absolutely nail the cook.
- Come on, Courtney.
- Whoo! For my entree, I'm doing something that's very, very traditional.
I'm making a sumac duck breast with spring vegetables and farro.
- Whoo! - Elizabeth! - Right, how you feeling? - Feeling good, chef.
How you gonna cook the lamb? I'm gonna sear it off in a pan and then finish it in the oven until it's medium-rare.
Earlier tonight you left things right to the very last minute for the appetizer.
I mean, are you gonna cut yourself a little bit more time across this one? Yes, I have plenty of time.
This is not like a pressure cooker situation.
I'm in full control of the lamb.
- Good luck.
- Thank you.
- Hello, Courtney.
- Hey.
With this duck, do you think that ii gonna be strong enough to go against a lamb? 'Cause a lamb, a Rolls-Royce cut, restaurant But you know what? So are my duck breasts.
And I started with the pig's ear, and because it was so out there, I wanted to do something that was a little bit more familiar.
- Ah, all right.
- All right, good luck.
Hey, Coop, you want to see some fire? Yeah! I mean, I can flambe, but I don't need to.
Let's go.
Courtney's duck is out.
Both Courtney and Elizabeth tonight, with these proteins, have the risk of temperature.
If they don't nail that medium-rare, that will certainly sink their dishes.
Gorgeous.
Looks perfect.
Nice, Courtney.
I think the pressure's getting to Elizabeth.
Courtney's already plating, and Elizabeth's lamb is not even cooked yet.
It's still in the oven.
Tonight, I am struggling with timing more than I have any time previously cooking in the MasterChef kitchen, and I think that it's the added pressure of everyone watching and everything that's at stake.
The lamb's out.
All right, do or die.
Here we go.
Beautiful.
Elizabeth, that looks amazing.
That one looks really rare.
Last three minutes.
Unbelievable.
Elizabeth is leaving everything to the last minute Just like she did with the appetizer.
Come on.
Very cool, Courtney.
Very cool.
Thanks.
- Looks good, Elizabeth.
- Looks good.
- Come on.
Let's go.
- Let's go.
Let's go.
Push, push.
Come on! Come on, Courtney! Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
Hands in the air! Way to go, Courtney! Please bring those stunning entrees down to the front.
Let's go.
Elizabeth, how are you feeling? Some of my plating was a little rushed at the end, but I think ultimately it looks beautiful.
Courtney, what do you think of Elizabeth's dish? I think that her lamb looks raw.
Ooh.
No, it's medium-rare.
Please, Elizabeth, Courtney, and the servers, bring those stunning entrees through to the MasterChef restaurant.
Let's go.
Thank you.
Courtney started something, and at this point, the gloves are off.
My dish is about to knock this bitch out.
It's on.
Let's begin tasting the entrees with Elizabeth.
It's a spiced lamb with red quinoa and rainbow chard, a carrot puree, and a mint yogurt tahini sauce.
I do feel, Joe, that you particularly got a dish where the lamb was a little bit under where I intended.
I wanted to serve it to yo a perfect medium-rare.
Well, if you were shooting for a perfect medium-rare, you didn't get there.
Mine's a rare to black and blue.
Gentlemen, shall we? Most people probably would want their lamb a little bit more cooked.
Mine was definitely rare.
If cooked properly, it could be fantastic, so a little bit of a letdown.
My lamb's cooked perfectly.
That rub on the lamb is absolutely spot-on.
And what you've nailed here was the quinoa.
Combined with the tahini and that yogurt sauce, delicious.
Puree, wonderful.
Good job.
Thank you.
Visually it's a beautiful dish.
I loved the pop of the carrot puree.
Couldn't have seasoned it any better.
I would absolutely order this again If I was in a restaurant and got it.
It's a knockout.
Really, really smart dish.
Thank you, chef.
Courtney, will you please present us with your entree? This is a sumac duck breast with spring vegetables and farro garnished with a pea tendril and a chive blossom pickle, and the sauce is a brandy pan sauce with the duck fat.
Visually gorgeous, and I think it tastes as good as it looks.
The duck breast is crispy and bacon-like and really amazing, and the sauce, buttery and rich, but ve concentrated in flavor, so you get a little bit melting on each bite.
Overall, one of the best dishes I think that you've put up.
- Very commendable.
- Thank you.
The farro is delicious.
It's very nutty.
It's concentrated.
The spring vegetables were cooked perfectly.
It has the shallots.
Everything is really spot-on.
You know, it looks like it came out of a restaurant.
I'm a bit of a stickler when it comes to cooking duck, 'cause it's one of the most difficult proteins to nail.
The duck, beautifully done.
Elegance matched with fragrance, matched with great finesse.
Stunning, absolutely stunning.
- Thanks, Courtney.
- Yeah.
Both of you did amazing jobs.
A lot to discuss, so why don't you go ahead and get ready to do those desserts? Two phenomenal entrees.
Courtney's duck was ambitious and very chef-driven.
It was well-thought out, and execution was perfect.
Elizabeth's lamb tasted delicious.
The flavors that she was working with were great.
The seasoning was right there.
As always, we're looking at the entire menu as a whole, so nobody is gonna win this based on where we're at right now.
We got to see that dessert.
I think that I made some small technical errors, but I'm still here.
Everything is on the line for this dessert course for me.
I got to nail it.
Elizabeth and Courtney, this next course will seal the deal for one of you.
Elizabeth, please describe your final course tonight.
For dessert, I'm making a grapefruit and olive oil cake with a plum trio.
Wow.
Courtney, please.
I'm doing a cherry meringue with salted chocolate and spiced almonds.
Now, what happens during the next 60 minutes will change one of your lives.
Your one hour starts Now.
Come on, Courtney.
Courtney's strong.
She's very strong, and she's a baker, so with desserts, she's a force to be reckoned with.
Courtney! Courtney! Yeah, Courtney! Elizabeth is the real deal.
I've watched her.
I've cooked with her.
And her cake's gonna be a winner.
Elizabeth! So what's the dish, Elizabeth? It's an olive oil and grapefruit semolina cake, so it almost has, like, that delicious kind of cornbread texture.
Right, love it.
Courtney obviously has a lot to gain by winning this.
She wants this bad.
This is a game changer for her.
You want it as much as she does? I absolutely want this as much as she does.
Just because I work in an office and not a nightclub does not mean I don't deserve to win this.
Spot on! Good luck, Elizabeth.
Whoo! All right, Courtney.
So a meringue.
I mean, any professional chef tonight would be looking at the meringue and saying, "What, in 60 minutes?" They take literally hours to dry out.
How are you gonna fast-track these? They're a nice, small size, so they're not gonna need as much time in the oven.
What is it with you that refuses to play safe? No reason to play it safe, especially when it's something this big.
You just got to go for it.
- Good luck.
- Thank you, chef.
Let's go.
Come on, Courtney.
Come on.
- Yeah! Come on, Elizabeth.
- Go, Elizabeth! Here we go.
The cake's out.
My cake is slightly undercooked in the middle.
Oh, her cake looks like a mess over there.
But I have a plan.
to use the outer edge, so it's gonna be perfectly moist.
Not too dry or overbaked, but still cooked and edible.
Good.
I wanted to make sure that the salt content in my meringue is right, So I take a bite of it - How is that, Courtney? - It's good.
And then I realize I don't have any extra meringues.
I ate one of the judges' meringues.
Uh-oh, something happened.
I'm gonna look like I've given them an incomplete plate.
Oops.
I have just quite possibly eaten $1/4 million.
I ate one of the judges' meringues.
Uh-oh, something happened.
One, two, three.
One, two, three.
I have just possibly eaten $1/4 million.
Let's go, ladies.
Last two minutes.
Come on.
Let's go.
That is beautiful.
Whoo! Come on.
Let's go.
Come on, guys.
Come on.
Whoo! Looks beautiful! Ten, nine, eight, seven, six, five, four, three, two, one.
and stop.
Wow.
Well done.
Bring your delicious desserts to the front of the bench.
Elizabeth, what do you think of Courtney's dessert? I think it looks like second place.
Ooh.
After this tasting, one of you two will be crowned this year's MasterChef.
Let's get it on.
We're gonna bring those desserts into the restaurant.
Courtney, please bring us your dessert.
Thank you.
I made for you a cherry meringue with salted chocolate and spiced almonds.
Did we miss one? 'Cause it looks like three complete piles, and then we each got one empty one.
I was so concerned with how everything tasted together that I ate one of the meringues that needed to be the top to the third.
Let's hope it tastes better than it looks.
Is there salt in anything else other than the chocolate on this plate? - The cherries.
- Something tastes salty.
- The cherries taste salty? - Cherries maybe.
I put a little bit of salt into the black cherries just to bring out that flavor of it.
That's either really brilliant or really stupid.
But after eating it and processing it in my mind, I have to say that I think It's brilliant.
Thank you, sir.
It is really elevating the intellectual component of a dessert to another level and making me not only eat it with my palate in my mouth but also digest it with my brain.
It's very intellectually and physically satisfying.
Thank you, sir.
The presentation obviously not what you wanted, but the taste is delicious.
The pastry cream with the vanilla bean going through it and the salted chocolate, all those are great.
The cherries balanced against the sweetness of those almonds, it's like this perfect harmony.
Kind of eye-opening.
I disagree with Joe.
Don't like salty cherries.
They taste like they're in a brine.
Meringues taste delicious.
I'm amazed you got them crisp on the outside, gooey and just right in the center.
Cooked to perfection, nailed them.
Pastry cream delicious.
The flavors are there, the texture's there, but it's just, sadly, your clumsiest plate.
I don't agree.
I apologize for that, chef.
Well Thank you.
Elizabeth, please step forward.
This is a grapefruit and olive oil semolina cake soaked in a grapefruit syrup with poached plums and just a little ground pistachio.
The actual olive oil cake I think is delicious.
I love the flavor.
It's got a great texture.
The puree is great.
The spiced pistachio helps balance the sweetness.
A really delicious dish.
Smart choice with this.
Thank you, chef.
Yeah, I'm putting this within the context of being an Italian dessert because my grandmother makes olive oil cake like this.
It's spot-on.
It's delicious.
It's rustic.
The coulis, the poached plums, the cake, the yogurt on top, fantastic.
It's a top-notch dish.
It fires on all cylinders.
Thank you.
Elizabeth, you knew it was undercooked in the center, yet you did the smartest thing, and you cut from the outside of the cake in.
There are professional chefs tonight watching that wouldn't even have the intelligence or the integrity to stand back and readjust, so I just want to commend you on that.
Thank you.
The cake itself, really delicious.
What makes it for me is the pink grapefruit, because that gives it the tartness, cuts the richness, and just really lifts that citrusy indulgence.
- Lovely.
- Thank you.
We now have to make one of the most difficult decisions We've ever made in this entire competition, a decision that will affect both your lives.
We'll be crowning one of you the new American MasterChef.
Please give us a moment.
Elizabeth's, first off.
The cake was perfect.
- Her best dish of the night.
- Right.
I'm super proud of what I've done today.
It has more of a connective thread, and I believe my dessert showed the judges that I deserve to win.
But I think that Courtney's dessert really kind of showed her thinking on another level.
Courtney's dessert was the weakest performing dish of our entire finale.
I disagree, 'cause it takes the parameters of what is a dessert and pushes it to the limits, and if we're not here to do that, then I don't know what we're here to do.
I took risks.
I was daring.
I didn't play anything safe, and to me, that's what a MasterChef is.
We judge based on the entire spectrum of this menu.
App, entree, dessert Who has the best collection overall? So Elizabeth's menu.
For the first 2/3 of this competition tonight, her time management was deplorable except for the last 1/3 where she nailed it on the dessert 100%.
Courtney's menu was the opposite.
She did not go on an ethnic or a regional theme.
Her menu was more enlightened cooking and taking risks.
I've never seen two finalists that were in the zone as much as these two.
We are seeing home cooks come through this kitchen who can, will, and should have an impact on how the rest of the world will eat.
So we agree we have a winner? - Oh, yeah.
- Yeah.
- Yeah? - Definitely.
Elizabeth and Courtney, you came to this competition as home cooks with a burning passion for food.
Medic.
Oh, my god.
is he all right? Elizabeth and Courtney, you came with a burning passion for food.
Medic.
- Oh, my god.
- Is he all right? Find some water, please, quickly.
- Oh, my god.
- Some water.
Get a chair.
Here we go.
Ross, you okay, bud? - Here we go.
- Honey, are you okay? There you go.
There's a chair.
Honey, are you okay? There's a chair behind you.
- Some water, please.
- He went white.
Oh, my god.
I passed out.
It's okay.
It's okay.
It's okay.
Oh, I-I felt like that was gonna happen.
It's okay.
Have some water, sweetie.
We haven't announced the winner yet, okay? So thanks for staying with us, okay? - When I pass out, I really pass out.
- Wait for me, bud.
You got to wait for me.
I'm so sorry.
I am so sorry.
- Welcome back.
Good? - I'm fine.
My husband loves me so much he passed out.
- Take a little sip of water.
- Okay.
- Take your time.
- Oh, my god.
I'm gonna have a heart attack.
But Gordon Ramsay saves the day yet again.
He gives him some water and picks him up and makes sure he's okay.
- You okay? - I'm good.
Elizabeth and Courtney, we are so proud of the two of you.
This is my fate.
This is my future.
I think today I gave a really winning performance, and I do think I deserve to win.
It's clear that you have both elevated your skill.
I am the epitome of MasterChef.
You're here to change your life.
Yeah, I worked in a gentleman's club.
That's behind me, because now winning this title is what changes everything.
Tonight confirmed that you two are phenomenal chefs, and that's why we'd like you both to come up here and switch places with us.
Our decision wasn't easy.
It came down to the tiniest of details.
That's how close it was this evening.
But as you know, there can only be one winner.
One of you is about to win $1/4 million.
One of you will go on to publish your very own cookbook.
And one of you will claim this The most coveted title in the culinary world, The title of MasterChef.
America's next great MasterChef is Congratulations Courtney.
Well done.
Well done.
- Thank you! - Oh, my god.
I've never given up.
I've been through the wringer.
I've made so many sacrifices, and this validates all of them.
You said I was worthy, daddy.
You're darn right, honey.
This trophy means no more student loans.
My mom gets a kitchen, and I have a secure future in cooking.
Yeah! Sorry, guys.
Oh, don't say that.
Ugh, why didn't I put the lamb in sooner? I'd be $250,000 richer.
But you know what, Courtney deserves it.
But I did things that I didn't think I was ever capable of doing.
I'm really proud of myself.
Mwah! Who's America's next MasterChef? Courtney! Salud.
My mom looking at me winning this title means so much to me.
Louder! I've had highs and lows.
I've come so far, and I've made her and my father and my siblings so proud of me.
- Whoo! - Whoo! Wow, what a night.
Now, if you think you've got what it takes to become America's next MasterChef, then please visit fox.
Com/MasterChef for details.
I cannot wait to see you.
I am America's MasterChef! Yeah! 
